Category: Migration and Development in AUSTRIA



Table of Contents:
Foreword 5
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 7
chapter 1 9
CARITAS CONCEPTUAL DEFINITIONS And views on migration
and development
1.1 Methodological approach 12
chapter 2 13
the national migratory context
2.1 Brief history of migration 13
2.2 Current stocks and flows and main groups 15
2.3. Geographical distribution 17
chapter 3 19
REALITY ON THE GROUND: HOW MIGRANTS CONTRIBUTE
 TO DEVELOPMENT
3.1 Contributions to development in Austria: 19
 The place of residence
 3.1.1 Patricipation in labour market 19
 3.1.2 Patricipation in business activity 22
 3.1.3 Contribution to welfare system 22
 3.1.4 Contributions to community, social, cultural, 23
 and economic development
 3.1.5 Migrants` and diaspora organisational 24
 presence and contributions
3.2 Towards regions and countries of 25
 origin and shared responsibility
 3.2.1 Economic remittances 25
 3.2.2 Outward foreign direct investments 28
 3.2.3 Socio-economic investments 29
 3.2.4 Social remittances 29
 3.2.5 Engagement in/for society and community 30
 3.2.6 Returnees contributions 32
chapter 4 33
OBSTACLES that impede migrants’ full
contributions to development
4.1 Labour market in Austria
 4.1.1 Access to the labour market linked
 to residence status 34
 4.1.2 Legal protection and treatment of 35
 migrant workers
4.2 Legal security regarding the residence status 36
4.3 General climate and attitudes towards migrants
 and refugees in Austria 38
4.4 Migrants` engagement in/for countries of origin 38
 4.4.1 Migrants` organisations engaging in
 development activities 41
chapter 5 43
Opportunities for contributions of
migration to development
5.1 Migrants and their engagement as an opportunity 43
5.2 Policies and promising practices 45
 5.2.1 The 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable
 Development Goals (SDGs) 45
 5.2.2 Development policies 46
 5.2.3 Promising practices 49
chapter 6
Conclusions and recommendati ons 53
chapter 7 59
Bibliography
Annexes 71
Photo: Shutterstock
foreword
Migration is as complex as development. Although there have
been many discussions on migration, there is still limited public
understanding, especially of how migration is connected to
development. This is reflected in a recent survey on the level of
information about migration in Austria. More than half of the
respondents said they are not well informed about immigration
and integration related matters. However, when asked about
migrants’ contributions to the cultural, economic and social
development in Austria, 35% believed that migrants do not
contribute at all, while 28% have mixed feelings about it. About
one third thought that migrants contribute positively to the
Austrian society (European Commission 2018).
In 2017, in order to contribute to a society that understands these
complexities and stands by those negatively affected, the MIND
project was launched. MIND, which stands for “Migration.
Interconnectedness. Development”, aims to address three areas
of concern:
•	 Root causes of forced migration: identifying reasons that
force people to migrate, contributing to the understanding
of linkages between migration and sustainable development,
and addressing the immediate needs of people forcibly
displaced.
•	 Welcoming and integrating migrants and refugees:
identifying safe and legal pathways of migration, promoting
humane asylum policies and the participation and long-term
integration in our societies.
•	 Facilitating migrants’ contribution to sustainable
development: involving migrants as development actors in
the countries of origin, but also in the countries of residence.
With the “Common Home” publication we want to raise
awareness on migrants’ contributions to development based on
research and facts, and to promote mutual understanding and
social cohesion. It is part of eleven national and one European
publications. The research paper explores the factors enabling
and limiting migration’s potential to contribute to development
in Austria and in the countries of origin; and how these factors
relate to migration and development policies in Austria. Finally it
includes concrete recommendations on how to enable a positive
participation of migrants as development actors.
 Bernd Wachter, General Secretary of Caritas Austria
 May 2019
Migration is a fact. It has always existed and will continue to
exist during our lifetime and beyond. The way in which
we see and deal with migration has however a profound effect on
the extent to which migration will become a success. Historically,
migration has been part of Austria and has brought benefits to the
country, as it has been the case in many other places in the world.
Therefore, we see migration first and foremost as an opportunity
that can benefit the migrant, the country of residence, as well as
the country of origin.
The positive contribution of migration to development has been
acknowledged at international level. However, public discussions
on migrants and persons seeking international protection in Austria
have been very controversial and increasingly hostile in the past
years, especially in the aftermath of the large refugee movement
in 2015/16 in the context of severe and protracted conflicts in
the Middle East. The public discourse in Austria about people
in need and in situations of hardship worries us. This discourse
excludes entire groups of people; and it increasingly challenges the
applicability of the universal human rights and the fundamental
access to them. This discourse also has an impact on social
cohesion and on the ultimate goal of living together respectfully.
Forced migration and displacement are linked to the overriding
questions of our time: Poverty and hunger, unemployment,
exploitation and severe inequalities, wars and armed conflicts.
In addition, the consequences of climate change are already
perceptible in many parts of our planet. Those conditions do not
befall our societies by destiny; they are, as the sociologist Ulrich
Beck (1986) observed, consequences of our actions.
Pope Francis (2015) reminds us that the Earth is “our common
home” and he urges a global dialogue on “how we are shaping
the future of our planet”. Therefore societal, economic, ecological
and political challenges have to be addressed in a comprehensive
manner (CAFOD et al. 2018); this is the only way how we can find
lasting solutions. With the 2030 Agenda, the same comprehensive
vision of the future for a sustainable development of the Earth
has been accomplished at a global level in order to leave no one
behind. However, the adoption of the 2030 Agenda, which was
an extraordinary success of the international community was a
first step, now the time for the realisation of its vision has come.
By Bernd Wachter, General Secretary of Caritas Austria

7
The “Common Home” publication approaches the question of
how migrants living in Austria contribute to the development
of both – Austria, their country of residence, and their
countries of origin – as well as to aspects of their integral
human development. Thereby, factors enabling and limiting
their contributions will be discussed. In line with the 2030
Agenda, development is understood as a concern of all
countries on the planet, not merely the so-called developing
countries in the Global South; in order to achieve development
for all, the commitment and participation of all groups within
all societies are needed.
The publication is the Austrian country report following the
common specifications developed by Caritas Europa and
the Global Migration Policy Associates within the MINDproject. It takes stock of the available sources on migration and
development, and builds on new empirical material to gain
a deeper understanding of these dynamics. It was produced
between April 2018 and March 2019 including desk research
and data review as well as thirteen guided interviews with key
stakeholders and experts on migration and development.
Both emigration and immigration have long been major
features of the history of Austria, and migrants have been
contributing to Austrian economic development and growth
as well as to many aspects of integral human development in
the country. Migrants today constitute a significant portion
of the work force. The vast majority is from wider Europe.
As the OECD put it, migrants are the major driver of total
employment growth in Austria. However, the treatment faced
by significant numbers of migrant workers in certain low
wage and higher risk sectors constitutes an impediment to
their welfare as well as to the contributions they can make to
the development and well-being of Austria, as well as to their
countries of origin.
Apart from multiple economic contributions, migrants engage
in community, social and cultural life either as professionals or
on a voluntary basis in Austria; through transnational ties they
Executive Summary
contribute through a set of different practices in their countries
of origin. Economic remittances are one of the most tangible
signs; while Austrian emigrants and others abroad send to
Austria nearly $3 billion per year, migrants in Austria remit
some $4 billion abroad. The former represents a substantial
contribution to the Austrian economy, while the latter can be
seen as a contribution to development and welfare in origin
countries, many of which are important economic partners for
Austria.
Besides economic contributions (economic remittances,
foreign direct investments, social-economic investments)
migrants engage, within their individual capacities (either
individually or organised, and mostly on a voluntary and
non-profit basis), with the communities in their countries of
origin. The organisations and projects exemplified throughout
the report range from charity work and social projects in
the field of education and promoting income-generating
activities, to transnational exchange of expert knowledge,
advocacy work, human rights’ observation, and fostering
diaspora entrepreneurship. The report found that the intrinsic
motivation and philanthropic interest of many migrants
engaging on a non-profit basis has to be considered as a
resource.
In this regard, stable and secure living conditions in Austria
are preconditions to engage. This reflects back on integration
policies and migrants’ possibilities to access the most relevant
societal spheres (such as the labour market among others),
and to a secure residence status in Austria. In addition, vivid
transnational networks are crucial to engage in countries of
origin.
Migrants’ organisations do not only direct their activities
towards their countries of origin but also engage in Austria;
many are active in the field of integration, in promoting
intercultural understanding and exchange. More generally
speaking they fulfil roles that are of great importance for the
particular situation of migrants, migration related issues and
8
both integration and developmental aspects, and promoting
mutual understanding should be further strengthened.
The UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
strengthened the role of migration in development processes
both in Europe and countries of the Global South. Addressing
all the relevant policies in Austria concerned by the SDGs can
become a powerful framework to improve future prospects of
all – in Austria and in developing countries – and to protect
the planet at the same time. Up until 2013, migration was
not explicitly discussed within the Austrian development
policy. Ever since, the government’s approach is to manage
and mitigate migration through development cooperation
(e.g. by conditioning the funds to readmission agreements and
their enforcement), which was criticised by the civil society.
There are untapped potentials to strengthen the Austrian
development cooperation in order to contribute to address
structural causes of forced migration such as poverty, hunger,
and inequality, to support host countries of asylum seekers and
refugees in the Global South; and to adress the large group
of internally displaced persons (IDPs). Austrian development
cooperation can certainly contribute – if it is substantial and
appropriately allocated – to the realisation of the 2030 Agenda
and the many Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
relevant to displacement, forced migration, and migrationrelated situations.
their integration process. The report showed that migrants’
organisations engaging in developmental activities are
confronted with: a lack of recognition by some development
actors, a need for more coordination with stakeholders in this
field, scarce resources, and issues referring to professionalism.
With the comparatively low spending on development
cooperation altogether and the scarce financial situation of
small initiatives, some migrants’ organisations complained
that there is not enough emphasis on development, which
they also see as an obstacle to fully contribute to development
themselves. In Austria, promising practices in the context of
migration and development initiated by or in cooperation
with migrants’ organisations can be found above all in the
fields of development education and awareness raising, and
the promotion of migrants’ entrepreneurship in countries of
origin.
While immigration makes major contributions to development
and to sustaining development in Austria, a large portion of
public opinion believed that migrants do not contribute at all to
the cultural, economic and social development in Austria, or else
they had mixed feelings about migrants. The attitudes towards
migrants and refugees in Austria are increasingly sceptical.
Media coverage, especially the way how it is reported and talked
about in the public domain could explain the more sceptical
public perception. Biased and inaccurate reporting, or even
false, generalising, and alarmist reporting led to an increasing
criminalisation of refugees and migrants; even if this reporting
is far from reality. In order to counter increasingly sceptical
public attitudes towards migrants and refugees in Austria,
existing initiatives contributing to a more realistic perception
of migrants and refugees, recognising their contributions in
Photo: Shutterstock
9
the latter applicable to nearly all international migrants. The
definition of a refugee in the 1951 Convention and 1967
Protocol on the Status of Refugees is: “someone who is unable
or unwilling to return to their country of origin owing to a well-founded
fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality,
membership of a particular social group, or political opinion”.
(UNHCR n.d.:para.4) All EU member States have ratified
both the 1951 refugee Convention and its 1967 Protocol.
In addition, international protection is granted to persons
seeking asylum (“asylum seekers”) who do not qualify as
refugees but as beneficiaries of subsidiary protection. They
receive international protection because they face real
risks of suffering serious harm if they would return to the
country of origin2
.
The International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their
Families (ICRMW) states that: “The term ‘migrant worker’
refers to a person who is to be engaged, is engaged or has been engaged
in a remunerated activity in a State of which he or she is not a
national”.3 That convention recognises frontier worker, seasonal
worker, seafarer, offshore worker, itinerant worker, and other
specific categories of migrant workers as covered under its
provisions. It states that all basic human rights cover family
members living with and dependent on migrant workers.
For Caritas, a human-centred and ethical approach is
fundamental to every policy. Thus, an ethical interpretation
of the relation between migration and development is essential
to frame the “Common Home” publication. Caritas’ vision,
actions and views are rooted in various legal and political
instruments and sources. The affirmation of human dignity,
equality of all, and inalienability of human rights as are
key moral principles to ensure the peaceful coexistence and
basic well-being of all persons and peoples on this planet.
Those include: the Universal Declaration of Human Rights1
(UDHR) and the eight fundamental United Nations
human rights covenants and conventions; the 1951 Refugee
Convention on the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol;
and the International Labour Standards defining principles
and rights for decent work; and recently the United Nations
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Catholic Social
Teaching (CST), the doctrine developed by the Catholic
Church on matters of social and economic justice and
fundamental Christian values are the foundations for Caritas
views and action.
Migration
Migration is a major feature of today’s globalised world. In
broad terms, migration is the movement of people from one place of
residence to another. While the term migration covers population
movement internal to a country – rural to urban or from one
locality to another in a different jurisdiction – the MIND
project addresses international migration. International
migration is a distinct legal, political and social category, as
people move from a nation-state in which they are citizens
with the rights and protections citizenship normally
confers, to other countries where rights and protections of
nationality, of access to social protection, and of common
identity often do not apply, and where social and cultural
paradigms may be significantly different.
While there is no international normative definition for
migration, there are international convention definitions
for refugees and for migrant workers and members of their families;
- chapter 1 -
CARITAS CONCEPTUAL DEFINITIONS
AND VIEWS ON MIGRATION AND
DEVELOPMENT


- chapter 1 -
CARITAS CONCEPTUAL DEFINITIONS
AND VIEWS ON MIGRATION AND
DEVELOPMENT
Photo: Val Morgan
10
treaties; therefore, if states do not make progress on the
actual realisation of human rights for all, the SDGs cannot
be reached.
Development aims at enhancing opportunities for people
to live in dignity and enjoy their fundamental rights.
When speaking of development, Caritas uses the concept
of integral human development, which places the human
person at the centre of the development process. It may
be defined as an all-embracing approach that takes into
consideration the well-being of the person and of all people
in seven different dimensions (Caritas Europa 2010).
•	 Social dimension, which focuses on the quality of
life in terms of nutrition, health, educemployment,
social protection and social participation as well as
equality of treatment and non-discrimination on any
grounds.
•	 Work and economic activity dimension as the main
means of self- and family sustenance, of socioeconomic engagement and of direct contribution to
development for most adults in all populations.
•	 Ecological dimension, which refers to the respect for
the goods of creation as well as ensuring the quality
of life of future generations without ignoring this
generation’s cry for justice.
•	 Political dimension, which includes the existence of the
rule of law; respect for civil, political, economic, social
and cultural human rights; democracy, in particular as
a representative and above all a participatory tool.
•	 Economic dimension, which relates to level of GDP
and distribution of income and wealth, sustainability
of economic growth, structure of the economy and
employment, degree of industrialisation, level of hightech ICT, and state capacity to obtain revenue for
human services and social protection, among other
considerations.
•	 Cultural dimension, which addresses identity and
cultural expression of communities and peoples, as
well as the capacity for intercultural dialogue and
respectful engagement among cultures and identities.
•	 Spiritual dimension. According to Catholic Social
Teaching (CST), social inequalities demand
coordinated action of all the people/ whole of the
society and the whole of government in all countries
for the sake of humanity based on two grounds: 1)
social questions are global, and 2) socio-economic
inequalities are a danger for peace and social cohesion.
However, a specific definition and statistical standards to
obtain reliable and comparable data globally on international
migrants have been agreed under UN auspices and are
used by most governments. For statistical purposes, an
international migrant is defined as “a person who has resided in a
country other than that of birth or citizenship for one year or more,
irrespective of the causes or motivations for movement and of legal
status in the country of residence .”
There are an estimated 260 million foreign-born people
residing today in countries other than those where they were
born or of which they held citizenship4
 (UNDESA 2017).
However, this figure does not include persons visiting a
country for short periods such as tourists, commercial or
transportation workers who have not changed their place
of established residence. Many other persons in temporary,
short-term or seasonal employment and/or residence
situations are not counted in UN and other statistics on
migrants when their sojourn is less than a year and/or if they
retain formal residency in their home or another country
– even though they may fit the definition of migrant worker.
For an accurate analysis of the interconnectedness
of migration and development, Caritas uses a broad
understanding of migration, inclusive of all those who are
refugees and asylum seekers as well as migrant workers and
members of their families.
Development
The pledge to leave no one behind and to ensure human
rights for all is a cornerstone of the UN 2030 Agenda and
the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), adopted by
all 193 UN Member States in 2015. It expresses their shared
vision of and commitment to a “world of universal respect
for human rights and human dignity, the rule of law, justice,
equality and non-discrimination; of respect for race, ethnicity
and cultural diversity; and of equal opportunity permitting the
full realisation of human potential and contributing to shared
prosperity. […] A just, equitable, tolerant, open and socially
inclusive world in which the needs of the most vulnerable are
met.”5
The 2030 Agenda promoted paradigm shifts in the
perception of development: development and sustainable
development concerns all countries on the planet; it is a
shared responsibility of all countries worldwide; protecting
the environment and tackling inequalities are considered
key development goals; peace and social justice are seen as
integral components of the universal development agenda;
and the need for the commitment and participation of
all groups within all societies and states is emphasised in
order to achieve development for all. The new worldwide
consensus on development is grounded in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and all human rights
11
for refugees in neighbouring countries, UN Member
States adopted the New York Declaration for Refugees
and Migrants8
, calling for improved global governance of
migration and for the recognition of international migration
as driver for development in both countries of origin and
of destination. The Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration (GCM) and the Global Compact on
Refugees (GCR), adopted in 2018, elaborated on those
principles and suggested ways of implementing them
through political dialogue and non-binding commitments.
Caritas recognises that a growing number of people are forced
to leave their countries of origin not only because of conflicts
and persecution but also because of other existential threats.
Those include poverty, hunger, unemployment and absence
of decent work, lack of good governance, absence of access
to education and healthcare, as much as the consequences of
climate change. Forced migration for Caritas encompasses all
migratory movements where an element of coercion exists.
People fleeing conflicts and persecution naturally have a
particular claim and right to international refugee protection.
Caritas also recognises that the overwhelming proportion
of migration in and to Europe reflects most EU member
countries’ objective need for ‘foreign’ labour and skills to
maintain viable work forces capable of sustaining their
own development. This demand results from rapidly
evolving technologies, changes in the organisation and
place of work and, particularly, declining native work
forces reflecting population aging and declining fertility.
Regardless of the legal status in a country, all migrants and
refugees possess inherent human dignity and human rights that
must be respected, protected and fulfilled by all States at all times.
In Caritas’ view, both people who migrate and those who
remain –whether in the country of origin or of residence–
have the right to find wherever they call home the economic,
political, environmental and social conditions to live in
dignity and achieve a full life. Caritas calls for a human
response of solidarity and cooperation to assume responsibility
In this sense, development of our own country and that
of others must be the concern of us all – the human
community.
Migration and development
The question of how development is linked to migration
is a centuries old law, policy and practical question. Vast
forced and voluntary population movements from the
17th century onwards provided the people to develop the
Americas North and South. This comprised both the forced
movement of millions of slave labourers from Africa and,
since the late 18th Century, millions of immigrants displaced
by wars, famine and industrial development in Europe.
Since the end of World War II, migration and development
has been the subject of intense discussions among policymakers, academics, civil society and the public. Pope Pius
XII dedicated an encyclical on “every migrant, alien and
refugee of whatever kind who, whether compelled by fear
of persecution or by want, is forced to leave his native land”
(Exsul Familia Nazarethana 1952), reaffirming that migrants
and refugees have a right to a life with dignity, and therefore
a right to migrate.
Under the impulse of regional integration and development
projects notably the European Economic Community since the
1950s succeeded by the European Union, as the development
of regional free movement for development systems in Central,
East and West Africa in the 1970s, as well as the development
of the (former) Soviet Union since the 1920s, the relationship
of migration and development became a fundamental pillar of
international integration and development across several regions
Spurred by geopolitical events that greatly affected human
mobility on a global scale, the relationship between migration
and development has since the 1990s and 2000s become
central in contemporary political and economic and social
policy debates. The first global development framework to
recognise the role of migration and its immense contribution
to sustainable development worldwide was the Declaration
and Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development at Cairo6
 in 1994.
The overarching contemporary framework is the abovementioned 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
with its Sustainable Development Goals. While explicit
reference to migration and development is laid out in SDG
Target 10.7 on “safe, regular and responsible migration
and mobility,” more than 43 SDG Targets across 16 of the
17 SDGs apply to migrants, refugees, displacement and
forced migration and/or migration-compelling situations7
.
In 2016, in the wake of severe and protracted conflicts in the
Middle East and South Asia and the collapse of basic provision
Photo: Jork Weismann
12
for integral human development worldwide and for the
protection and participation of people on the move –migrants
and refugees. Migration contributes to the integral human
development of migrants and of members of their countries
of residence. Such a vision implies the recognition that
migration, regardless of its drivers, is an opportunity for our
societies to build a more prosperous, global ”Common Home”,
where everyone can make a contribution and live in dignity.
1.1 Methodological approach
The present report was developed based on common
specifications for the Common Home national publications
of the MIND project. The report takes stock of the available
sources on migration and development, and builds on new
empirical material to gain a deeper understanding of these
dynamics. It was produced between April 2018 and March
2019 including a two month desk research and data review
as well as thirteen guided interviews with key stakeholders
and experts on migration and development (10 face-to-face
and 3 via telephone). Migrants’ organisations and projects
exemplified in the report are written in bold; for the internet
sources please refer to the Annex.
The desk research and data analysis included a review of
existing literature, including academic, policy and conference
papers, analytical reports by Austrian and international
organisations, news reports, relevant websites and online
publications, and other sources of information on the topic of
migration and development in Austria. The report follows a
multidisciplinary approach.
Katerina Kratzmann implemented the interviews and wrote
several parts of the report based on desk research, data
review and the responses of the interviews; Katharina Hartl
was responsible for the chapter on migrants’ contribution to
development in Austria and integration related topics. The
report was written with the support of Caritas Austria,
Global Migration Policy Associates (GMPA) and Caritas
Europa. The recommendations build on the findings of the
report and were written by Caritas.
13
former settlement areas, temporarily settled in Austria; about
half million stayed in the country (ibid).
While little research has been done, it is reasonable to estimate
Austrians living elsewhere and who identify Austrian ancestry
or origins resulting from emigration at several million. In the
USA alone, 948,558 persons identified themselves as of full or
partial Austrian descent in the 1990 Census. It is estimated
that in the years from 1820 to 1960, 4.2 million or ten percent
of the immigrants who arrived in the USA came from AustroHungary and the states succeeding it (Jones 2010). Significant
numbers of people in Australia, Canada, present-day Germany
and other countries around the world can also trace ancestry
to Austrian origins. As noted below, remittances to Austria
represent nearly $3 billion in value, much of which comes
from Austrians abroad and from people of Austrian origin
who maintain family and in some cases business ties with their
country of origin.
Austria went through more major events in the Second
Republic which led to important reconfigurations of the
patterns of migration and the emergence of new migratory
phenomena (Kraler and Sohler 2007).
During the Cold War, between 1955 and 1989, Austria hosted
a number of persons seeking international protection, mainly
from Eastern Europe; for most of them Austria was a country
of transit. In the Hungarian Uprising in 1956 about 180,000
Hungarians sought international protection in Austria; by
the end of December 1956 nearly 88,000 left Austria (Carlin
1989) and approximately 20,000 stayed long-term (Bauer
2008). In 1968, about 162,000 Czechs and Slovaks came to
Austria fleeing the Soviet military repression of the so-called
“Prague spring”; 12,000 of those stayed in the country, whilst
many were resettled to third countries elsewhere in Western
Europe and beyond (ibid). A few years later – in 1972 –
Austria accepted the first non-European refugees based on
2.1 Brief history of migration
In the middle of the 16th century, the composer and poet
Wolfgang Schmeltzl (1913 [1549]) observed in his eulogy
about Vienna that one could listen to German, French, Italian,
Spanish, Hebrew, Hungarian, Greek, Latin, Turkish, Czech,
Dutch, and others. Austria – especially the greater Viennese
area – has a long history of emigration and immigration; being
placed in the centre of Europe, Austria has also been a country
of transit.
In the late period of the Austria-Hungarian Empire there
have been two major migration movements as a consequence
of poverty, lack of perspectives and persecution: transatlantic
emigration mainly to Northern America, and internal labour
migration to the industrialized and urban centres of the entire
empire. Since the beginning of the 19th century the population
of the imperial and residence city of Vienna grew about 1.7%
each year, from 700,000 in 1880 to more than 2 million people
in 1910, mainly due to internal migration from the periphery
of the monarchy; the number of foreigners, people from
outside the empire, was on the contrary very low (Bauer 2008;
Bauböck 1996). At the same time emigration rose significantly
all over Europe. In 1910, 3.5 million people from the AustrianHungarian Empire lived abroad, above all in the United States
of America and the German empire (Fassmann 1990).
The First World War and the formation of the first Republic
brought major changes: the first major refugee movement
and the transformation of former citizens of the monarchy
into foreigners (Bauböck 1996). After the National Socialist
takeover in Austria, about 128,000 Austrian Jews were leaving
forcibly the country until 1941. In 1945, after the Second
World War, approximately 1.6 million displaced persons –
forced labourers from Central and Eastern Europe, prisoners
of war, survivors of concentration camps and surviving Jews
and other persecuted groups – found themselves in Austria;
many left the country within a few months. At the same time,
about one million Germans who had been expelled from
- chapter 2 -
THE NATIONAL MIGRATORY
CONTEXT
14
countries such as the Philippines or India, and particular
sectors and niches such as nursing staff and the colportage
of newspapers with different residence and employment
perspectives (König et al. 2015).
The early 1990s and the fall of the iron curtain brought new
changes – especially the political situation in Rumania and
the subsequent arrival of refugees led to some amendments
of the Asylum Act and a significant tightening of the foreign
law (Bauer 2008). In addition, the war in the Balkan region
affected Austria because due to the geographical proximity
many people from Bosnia-Herzegovina sought international
protection in Austria. 90,000 refugees were given a temporary
permission to stay until 1995. Furthermore, in 1998/99,
when the expulsion of Kosovo-Albanians escalated, 13,000
Yugoslavian nationals (mainly from Kosovo) claimed asylum
in Austria. Between 1989 and 1993 the share of foreign
nationals almost doubled from 387,000 to 690,000. Reasons
for this increase were the opening of the Eastern borders, wars
and subsequent displacements, and the need for foreign labour
as well as immigration of family members (ibid).
Several laws concerning migrants and refugees were amended
after 2003/04 and stricter rules concerning work permits for
foreigners and their stay in Austria applied (Pöschl 2015). As
a result, the migration balance decreased for a while as can be
seen in the graph on the next page.
international commitments: 1,500 refugees of Asian origin
expelled from Uganda by the Idi Amin regime; 1.400 of them
left Austria to go to the Netherlands, Sweden, Canada and
Great Britain (Asylkoordination 2011). Afterwards, in the
mid-1970s Austria provided protection to about 1,000 refugees
from Chile as well as about 2,000 refugees from Indochina
until 1983. Another persecuted group were Iraqi Kurds.
Austria offered international protection to 100 of them in
1974 (ibid). In 1980/1981 people sought protection in Austria
from Poland. The country declared martial law and 120,000
people arrived of which 90% moved on to other countries
(Bauer 2008). In addition, about a quarter of a million Jewish
refugees from the Soviet Union stayed in Austria temporarily
between 1973 and 1989. Many migrated to Israel and the USA
(Bauböck 1996).
As a consequence of the long phases of high economic growth
starting in the 1950s, there was a lack of workers, which was also
fuelled by Austrians emigrating to Germany and Switzerland
(Bauer 2008). At that time the demand was predominantly
high for low-skilled workers in the textile industry, metal
and construction work as well as in the service sector. The
main objective of the so-called “guest-worker-system” was
“satisfying immediate labour demand, i.e. of reducing general
and specific labour scarcities of domestic enterprises via
migration.” (Biffl 2017:135) The system built on the idea of
the rotation of temporary workers and was legally based on
bi-lateral agreements. The first one was agreed on with Spain
in 1962; however, no workers came to Austria. An agreement
with Turkey followed in 1964 and with former Yugoslavia in
1966. As a consequence, 265,000 persons moved to Austria
between 1961 and 1974. In the early 1970s the share of foreign
workers was 6.1% (thereof, 78.5% were pre-war Yugoslavia
nationals and 11.8% Turkish citizens) (Bauer 2008). The
population share of foreigners in Austria rose significantly due
to this system: In 1961, about 102,000 foreign nationals lived
in Austria (1.4% of the total population); in 1974, the share
rose to 4.1% with 311,690 foreign nationals living in Austria
(MSNÖ2016).
After the oil crisis and a peak of approximately 230,000
guest-workers residing in Austria in 1973, the programme
was put on hold and new immigration of guest-workers was
severely reduced (MSNÖ 2011). Nevertheless, the number
of foreigners coming to Austria kept rising due to family
reunification of the guest-workers. A legal decree from the
Social Ministry from 1974 made it difficult for some workers
to return to Austria once they left the country – so rather than
returning, some migrants stayed and moved their family to
Austria (Gächter 2008). This was echoed in the famous saying
of Max Frisch: “We asked for workers. We got people instead.”
In the same period there were other recruiting channels
differing from the guest-worker system that targeted specific
15
2.2 Current stocks and flows and
main groups
Since the 1960s, the population of Austria has increased by
1.2 million people and migration played an important role
in the overall population growth (Statistics Austria and KMI
2017). Austria became a country with a variety of foreigners
coming from countries all over the world - foreign citizens
from 143 countries (excluding the EU-27) lived in Austria in
the beginning of 2018.
In 2017, 15.3% (or 1.3 million people) of the population of
Austria (8.7 million people) held a foreign nationality. An even
higher percentage, 22.1% of the total population (1,897,977
individuals), were people with “migrant background” (both
parents born abroad), while the majority had no “migrant
background” (Statistics Austria and KMI 2017). Persons with
“migrant background” are on average younger (34.6 years)
than Austrian nationals (42.5 years). 22% of the population
with “migrant background” were younger than 19 years;
35.6% were between 20 and 39 years old; 32.7% were in the
age category 40-64 years; and 9.7% were 65 years and older
(ibid). The majority of foreign nationals residing in Austria
were coming from European countries with half of them
originating from EU-/EFTA-countries (Statistics Austria
2018a). In 2017, Germans were by far the largest group of
foreigners residing in Austria (more than 181,600 people).
Due to historical migration movements Serbs are the second
largest group (118,000 people), followed by Turkish nationals
(117,000 people) and people from Bosnia-Herzegovina (95,000
people). Romanians are the fifth largest group of foreigners
living in Austria (92,000 people). The number of Romanians
residing in Austria increased especially after Romania entered
A few years later, since 2010, migration to Austria has steadily
increased. Migrants come mainly from other EU member
states and/or the counties of origin of former guest-workers
and refugees (Statistics Austria and KMI 2017). Similar
to other European countries, Austria received a significant
number of refugees in 2015/16 due to conflicts in the Middle
East region. In 2014, 28,064 persons applied for international
protection. In 2015, the number more than tripled with
88,151 applications (BM.I 2015). Afterwards, the number
decreased again with 42,073 applications for asylum in
2016; 24,296 asylum applications in 2017, and 12,529 until
November of 2018 (BM.I 2016; BM.I 2017; BM.I 2018b).
Most persons asking for international protection in 2015 and
2016 came from Syria and Afghanistan followed by Iraq,
Iran and Pakistan (BM.I 2017). Main countries of origin
of asylum seekers in 2018 were Syria, Afghanistan, Iran,
Russian Federation, Iraq, Nigeria, Somalia and Georgia with
significant differences in the quota of recognition (e.g. persons
from Georgia and Nigeria have very limited chances to be
accepted for international protection, whilst Syrian and Iran
nationals have a much higher recognition rate) (BM.I 2018b).
Figure 1: Migration balance in Austria 1961-2016 disaggregated by citizenship (Number of persons)
Source: Statistics Austria 2017
16
to Austria was just over 43,000 representing the entirety of
the modest population growth of the country by two tenths
of one percent. Meanwhile, the native population faces ageing
and decline as the fertility rate for the country is well below
population replacement at 1.47 children born on average per
woman (2017 estimate), in fact one of the lower rates across
the EU.
Over the last forty years, net immigration only surpassed
50,000 per year in two spike periods of refugee emergency
inflows, in 1989-91 and 2015-2016. Overall, migrant arrivals
have barely compensated for work force ageing and numerical
decline – except for the spike year of 2015. Austria’s population
growth has been small since the 1990s, and the Austrian work
force is in decline; the overall number of people in the work
force is facing a decline even with current immigration levels.
According to a survey on skills shortages in Austrian mediumsized companies, a vast majority (79%) had difficulties to
find qualified employees (Ernst & Young 2018) as today
there are relatively few European workers available to fill gaps
in Austrian and other EU labour forces. More than half of
the foreigners who came to Austria between 2007 and 2011
did not stay longer than five years in the country (Statistics
Austria and KMI 2017). From those who moved to Austria in
this period, 54% left the country within five years and 46%
stayed longer. Persons who stayed longer in Austria were from
Afghanistan (78%), Turkey (66%) and Kosovo (65%) as well
as Germany (54%). On the contrary the shortest stays were
observed from Iran (25%) and the United States of America
(21%).
the EU in 2007 (Statistics Austria and KMI 2017). Syria and
Afghanistan were the most prominent countries of origin for
refugees.
In addition to the several hundred thousand resident migrants
living and working in Austria, the country has a large
contingent of temporary foreign workers. Posted workers
who are employed in an EU member state and sent for a short
term to Austria to carry out services, are mainly coming from
neighbouring countries, as will be shown below. There is also
a number of seasonal workers, mainly from European third
countries working in agriculture, forestry, and tourism. Another
group who works in Austria but resides in neighbouring
countries are cross-border or so-called frontier workers; they
return to their country of residence daily, or at least once a
week. Furthermore, according to Gudrun Biffl (2017) various
forms of temporary third-country employment, especially
household help - measured by an increase in permits for this
category for au-pairs, third-country students and cross-border
service providers – has become more important since 2010.
Concerning migration movements to and from Austria, in
2017 a total of 154,749 persons moved to the country while
110,119 left. The majority of persons moving to Austria were
foreign nationals (139,329) including 86,552 persons from
EU-/EFTA-states entering the country on the basis of the
freedom of movement; 52,777 were third-country nationals.
The majority of people leaving Austria were also foreign
citizens (89,556), of which 53,034 were from EU-/EFTAstates, and 36,522 were third-country nationals (Statistics
Austria 2018b). Thus, in 2017 the net migration/immigration
Figure 2: Top-15 Nationalities living in Austria as per 1.01.2018
Source: own graph, data: Statistics Austria 2018a
SYRIA
POLAND
CROATIA
HUNGARY
BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA
RUMANIA
20 000
40 000
60 000
80 000
100 000
120 000
140 000
160 000
180 000
KOSOVO
BULGARIA
ITALY
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
SLOVAKIA
AFGHANISTAN
TURKEY
SERBIA
GERMANY
48 116
62 187
76 690
77 174
95 221
102 242
25 040
27 455
29 183
32 382
40 196
45 720
117 277
120 341
186 891
200 000
17
2.3 Geographical distribution
Most foreigners in Austria live in Vienna followed by Upper
Austria (13%), Lower Austria (12%), Styria (9%), Tyrol
(8%), Salzburg (7%), Vorarlberg (5%), Carinthia (4 %) and
Burgenland (2%). The percentage of foreigners varies widely
within the country with percentages ranging from 2% up to
40% with the highest rate in Vienna (Statistics Austria 2017a).
When looking at the local level, it becomes obvious that most
foreigners residing in Austria live in the bigger cities such as
Vienna, Linz, Graz, Salzburg and Bregenz. Communities
tend to concentrate in bigger cities due to infrastructure, work
possibilities, child care and the fact that there are already
migrant communities they can connect to.
Third-country nationals who want to stay in Austria for
a period longer than six months require a residence title
according to their residency purposes; for periods of less than
six months a visa must be applied for if necessary. In 2016,
25,600 first residence permits were issued to third-country
nationals: Approximately 1,200 were granted to skilled and
highly skilled workers (residence permit “Red-White-Red” or
“Blue Card EU”) and 14,200 to persons coming to Austria
via family reunification. Another 7,400 were issued to pupils,
students and clerical staff as well as au-pairs and researchers,
plus 3,200 seasonal workers (ibid).
Concerning migrants holding no regular residence permit,
often referred to as irregular migrants, the measurement is
very difficult; irregularity does not only refer to irregular
entry or emigration (e.g. unrecorded returns), there are
other paths leading to an irregular residence status (e.g.
overstaying, withdrawal of residence status, births) (Kraler
and Reichel 2011). However, there is little information about
this phenomenon; therefore, for statistical approximation
often the numbers of seizures by the police are used. In the
report of the Migration Council for Austria (Migrationsrat für
Österreich 2016) lower and upper limits of irregular migrants
present in the country are estimated to be between 95,000 and
254,000 in the course of 2015, which is a share of 1.1% to
2.9% of the total population. As this reflects the situation in
2015 – today, almost four years later – it can be assumed that
this estimate dropped as some of the people who came to
Austria in 2015/16 applied for international protection and
are recognised refugees today or they might have gone back
to the country of origin or to another country.

19
- chapter 3 -
REALITY ON THE GROUND
HOW MIGRANTS CONTRIBUTE TO DEVELOPMENT
Migrants’ contributions to the development of the
Austrian society and to their countries of origin are
hardly recognised by the public as shown by a recent survey
(European Commission 2018). However, in spite of existing
obstacles, migrants have an impact on societies in a variety
of ways: as employees and self-employed, as taxpayers and
social insurance contributors as well as consumers. Apart from
the economic development, migrants engage in community,
social and cultural life either as professionals or on a voluntary
basis. They often keep transnational ties to family, friends,
former working colleagues and others in their countries of
origin and through these people, they contribute to their
places of origin (Waldrauch and Sohler 2004; König et al.
2015). These contributions can have an economic nature and
often include societal engagement. Nevertheless, this chapter
can only give an overview of a range of relevant areas; many
others such as the political participation are not covered or
can only be touched lightly such as their influence on cultural
contributions9
. While the first part of this chapter discusses
their contribution either on an individual basis or through
migrants’ organisations towards development in Austria, the
second part focuses on the countries of origin.
3.1 Contributions to development
in Austria: The place of residence
3.1.1 Participation in labour market
Migrants have long been part of the Austrian labour market,
contributing to economic development and growth in a
variety of sectors. The history of labour migration in the
Second Republic dates back to the early 1960s. Austria has
a high and increasing proportion of foreigners in the labour
force. While in 2009 10.6% (out of 3.99 million employed
people) had a foreign citizenship, the proportion of foreigners
increased to 15.3% out of 4.26 million employed people in
2017; 20% were born abroad (reflecting hardly no percentage
change compared to 2009). More than 22% had a migrant
background at that time. About 9% of the total labour force
came from the European Economic Area (EU-/EFTAmember states), and 6% are third-country nationals. The
composition of the foreign labour force by nationality has
changed in recent years, primarily due to the rising share of
EU citizens; especially the proportion of persons from pre-war
Yugoslavia, the most important source region in the 1970s for
foreign labour via the guest-worker system, has been declining
dramatically (Biffl 2017).
Photo: Isabel Corthier
20
Figure 3: Foreign labour force in Austria by citizenship and sex 2017 (as % of total)
Source: own graph, data: Statistics Austria. . Labour Force Survey (Microcensus), average of all weeks of a year. Population in
private households. 1) Member states as per 1.05.2004, 1.01.2007 and 1.07.2013; 2) Without Croatia and Slovenia
The most populous migrant groups by citizenship are
proportionally represented in the labour market: In 2017,
2.5% of all wage earners are Germans; respectively 1.2% are
from Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia, followed by Romania,
Serbia (incl. Montenegro) and Turkey (each with 1.1%) as
well as Hungary (1%). Approximately 16% of all male wage
earners had a foreign citizenship, compared to 15% of all
female earners.
The majority of the foreign labour force is from Europe: 89%
are Europeans, 7% are from Asia, and about one percent is
respectively from African countries (1.3%), Central/South
America (1.3%) and North America (0.8%).
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
EU 28
 (without Austria)
NEW MEMBER STATES 1)
EU 15
FORMER YUGOSLAVIA 2)
TURKEY
OTHER THIRD COUNTRIES
IN TOTAL
14
16
18
8,9 8,8 9,1
5,4 5,1 5,8
3,5 3,7
3,3
2,8 3,1
2,5
1,1 1,4
0,8
2,4 2,5 2,4
15,3 15,7
14,7
IN TOTAL
MALE
FEMALE
21
suggests that processes of displacement of native-born workers
are not very pronounced since “migrants are concentrated in
some labour market segments, from which locals move.” (Biffl
and Schütz 2004:26)
In the past, migrant workers have contributed to overcome
labour shortages, especially in auxiliary work and low skilled
labour, and thereby helped to seize opportunities for economic
development. Migrants’ contribution to the Austrian economy
has to be seen in the context of the original economic intention
to promote the competitiveness of the export industry, mainly
in the labour intense industrial-commercial areas (e.g. textile,
leather, clothing products) or in services that are highly
competitive such as tourism (ibid).
Overall, immigration has provided a significant boost to
Austria’s economic development by providing labour in
important economic sectors where native labour has become
increasingly scarce due to ageing and decline in the native
work force, and by rising educational and skill levels of nativeborn men and women.
b. Posted workers
Apart from resident migrant workers, Austria has a large
contingent of short term posted workers. In 2015, 108,627
permits were issued for posted workers coming to Austria;
the country ranked 4th in the EU after Germany, France
and Belgium (Hollan and Danaj 2018). This was an increase
by 7.5% compared to 2014 and constituted a share of 2.7%
of workers in national employment. Slovenia, Germany,
Hungary, Slovakia and Poland were the five main countries
of origin. About 54% of the posted workers in Austria were
at construction sites, followed by the service sector (25%) and
other industrial activities (20%) (ibid).
c. Seasonal work
Seasonal work in agriculture and forestry as well as summer
and winter tourism with the latter being an important driver
for the economic development can only be covered partially
by labour force residing in Austria. Since working conditions
are hard and physically demanding and the minimum salary is
low, it is difficult to find workers. Third-country nationals who
are not based in Austria are encouraged to work on the basis
of a temporary employment permit for the time of the season.
Furthermore, seasonal work is one of the few fields of activities
to which asylum seekers have access to. The access to seasonal
work for third-country nationals12 is regulated by an annual
quota and subject to a visa (seasonal worker directive (BGBl.
I Nr. 66/2017)).
In 2017, a total of 13,342 temporary employment permits
for third-country nationals13 were issued, mostly to people
a. Employment and economic sectors
Migrants contribute to the most important employment and
economic sectors in Austria and are according to OECD
(2017) “the major driver of total employment growth” in
Austria: In 2017, 16% of the total labour force in the services
sector and 16% of all workers in the industry and commerce
hold a foreign citizenship (Statistics Austria 2017b10). The
services sector generates 70.4% of the overall economic
performance including all private and public services (e.g.
public administration, accommodation and food services,
transportation) in 2017, and it hosts about 71% of the
total labour force. The industry and commerce sector (e.g.
manufacturing, mining) accounts for 28.4% of the Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) and for 25% of the total labour
force. Agriculture and forestry11 make up the remaining 1.2%
of the GDP (WKO 2018; Statistics Austria 2017b).
Some economic sectors depend highly on migrant workers
such as administrative and support services (e.g. rental and
leasing activities, travel agencies, services to buildings or call
centres) with 35% of all workers having a foreign citizenship.
About 35% of all workers in the accommodation and food
services sector (e.g. hotels, gastronomy) are migrants. Other
economic sectors with a high percentage of foreign compared to
Austrian citizens are private household activities (e.g. domestic
work) (30.2%); arts, entertainment and recreation (21.6%);
construction (20.6%); transportation and storage (16%);
information and communication (15.1%); manufacturing
(14.8%); professional, scientific and technical activities
(12.7%); education (12.2%); human health and social work
(11.2%). The tourism sector plays a central role in Austria
accounting largely for a positive balance of all economic
activities and for one fifth of all employees (Wiener Zeitung
2018b). It has an impact on different economic sectors such
as accommodation and food services, the arts, entertainment
and recreation sector, transportation as well as travel agencies
to which migrants contribute significantly (WKO 2018).
From the perspective of migrant workers in Austria the most
important sectors are the manufacturing sector - 15% of all
migrant workers are employed in this sector - followed by
accommodation and food services (14%), wholesale and
retail trade and the repair of motor vehicles (13.3%) as well as
construction (10.8%).
According to Biffl (2017:127), migrants occupy either the low or
the high end of skilled positions “indicating a certain extent of
complementarity in employment” with regard to the Austrian
labour force. Whereas EU citizens tend to work in academic
professions such as engineering and related professions,
third-country citizens are to a great extent hired at the lower
end of the skills’ spectrum (e.g. workers in manufacturing,
construction, transport and mining). Research in Austria
22
3.1.3 Contribution to welfare
system
About 63% of all persons in Austria with migrant background
aged between 15 to 64 years are working (Statistics Austria
and KMI 2017). Since the Austrian social security system
is based on a mandatory insurance for employees and selfemployed and their dependants; labour taxation (income tax
and social security contributions) is the main funding source
of the welfare system (health, unemployment, pensions).
According to Biffl (2017:173), migrants contribute primarily
through social security contributions, wage and value added
taxes. However, inflows of migrants over the past decade,
particularly from new EU member states and more recently
from Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria seeking international
protection resulted in discussions on their contribution
to the economic development and the welfare system. An
additional, more specific discussion emerged around the costs
of providing international protection to asylum seekers and
integration measures for recognised refugees (Berger et al.
2016; Prettenthaler et al. 2016).

Debates on the effects of migration on the national budget
and especially on the social system in Austria came up
already in the late 1980s when labour supply was growing
(as a consequence of the baby boomers entering the labour
market) and when immigration was more and more a result
of family reunification and an increasing number of people
sought international protection in Austria (Biffl 2017). Before,
it was “obvious that they were paying more into the welfare
system than they took out, as they were in the main prime age
workers.” (ibid 2017:174)
According to a report from the Federal Ministry of Social
Affairs (BMASK 2016), the foreign population contributes in
total considerably more to the Austrian social system than they
receive in terms of social cash benefits. A total of €5.3 billion,
this is 9.5% of all social security contributions, have been paid
into the social security system in 2015 by foreign citizens17.
In the same year, they received 6.1% or €3.7 billion of social
cash benefits. In comparison, Austrians paid €50.5 billion into
the social system and received €57.6 billion in cash benefits.
Foreign citizens are net contributors to the social system:
Austrians received €970 more per capita in 2015 in terms of
social cash benefits than they paid in; while foreign citizen pay
€1,490 more than they receive. Compared to Austrians the
contribution per capita in 2015 of foreign citizens financing
the social state was higher by €2,460 (ibid).
The social security system is based on the principle of social
equilibrium (solidarity principle). The age – an above average
proportion of Austria’s foreign population is younger than 50
from Bosnia-Herzegovina, followed by Ukraine, Serbia and
Kosovo. Thereof, 662 permits were issued to asylum seekers.
About 23% of the seasonal workers in 2017 were core seasonal
workers (“Stamm-Saisonniers”), mostly coming from BosniaHerzegovina and Serbia (AMS 2017). There are far more
seasonal workers than the number of issued employment permits
suggests because many are citizens of the new EU-member
states and are not subject to employment permits (Biffl 2011).
3.1.2 Participation in business
activity
In 2017, there were 465,000 self-employed in Austria with
about four out of ten hiring employees. Well-established firms
and their employees play an important role in the economic
development and high living standards in Austria (OECD
2017). Self-employment among migrants in Austria is relatively
new compared to the long history of labour migration. “It was
not until the settlement of ‘guest workers’ and their families
that self-employment of foreigners set in. This was a slow
process and gained momentum only in the 1990s.” (Biffl 2017:
135) In 2017, 52,000 people with a foreign citizenship - that is
8% of the foreign labour force - is self-employed (compared to
11.4% of the Austrian labour; excluding assisting dependants).
About a third hires employees. More than 60% thereof are
EU citizens; the remaining percentage holds other thirdcountry citizenships14. 72,500 self-employed have a migrant
background (both parents born abroad) (Statistics Austria
2017b).
Many newcomers are increasingly starting their own
companies, mostly in the legal form of an individual company15.
This might in part be explained by the difficulties migrants
face finding stable employment (Biffl and Schütz 2004).
About 31% of all individual entrepreneurs had a migratory
background16 when registering their business as per 1st January
2017; not all of them are residing in Austria. More than 7%
of all individual entrepreneurs have a Slovakian citizenship,
about the same percentage are Romania citizens, and 2%
are German citizens. Persons with migrant background are
particularly often engaged in commerce and crafts (41%),
followed by transportation (31%), tourism and the leisure
industry (20%) and trade (14%) (WKO 2017). According to a
study on companies run by people with migrant background
in Vienna there is a great diversity of migrant entrepreneurship
apart from the commonly known international restaurants,
mobile and call shops, supermarkets and traditional crafts
run by people with migrant background (Schmatz and
Wetzel 2014). Those companies are far from having only a
niche function for the respective country of origin; they have
rather an important supply function for the entire Viennese
population and are relevant for the local economy.
23
Apart from employment and business activities and the
economic development in Austria, there is often a blind spot
on non-remunerated and voluntary activities. Contributions
on a voluntary basis are yet crucial to the development of
societies; they contribute considerably to the social, cultural,
and political cohesiveness of societies, to mutual support of
people and to a peaceful living together (Meyer et al. 2009). In
Austria, voluntary work is of great importance either carried
out formally in organisations, associations and clubs, within
loosely formalised local initiatives and platforms, or in active
neighbourhoods. In 2016, about 2.3 million people in Austria
worked voluntarily in an organisation or association; about
the same amount of people contributed informally within the
family and circle of friends or in their neighbourhood (IFES
2016).
Migrants contribute to community life as neighbours, as club
members or as volunteers. The most recent report on voluntary
commitment in Austria reveals that people with migratory
background18 are represented in every sector within formalised
voluntary work, starting from sports to environment
protection and animal welfare; however, they are less often
engaged in formalised settings than Austrians. Nevertheless,
people with migrant background engaged very actively within
the formalised refugee aid, voluntary educational work, within
the social and health sector as well as the religious sector (ibid).
Informal voluntary work such as unpaid child care, assisting
persons in need of care or manual and technical assistance
for neighbours or friends is of great importance for migrants.
People with migrant background are above average engaged
in neighbourhood assistance or informal help for refugees.
However, the study does not reveal voluntary contributions
(either formally or informally and on an individual level)
towards developing regions and in the case of people with
migratory background towards their countries of origin.
The engagement of persons residing in Austria in the field of
development activities was not surveyed.
years – is the main reason for higher social security contributions.
Since the majority of social security contributions and taxes
are paid into the social system during the active employment
phase, migrant workers have been financing in 2015 parts of
the social benefits for Austrians due to the on average younger
age structure. Biffl (2017:175) comes to a similar conclusion:
“[M]igrants tend to contribute more to social budgets than
they take out. This may not come as a surprise as the Austrian
welfare system is contribution based and has a relatively small
redistributive capacity.”
3.1.4 Contributions to community,
social, cultural, and economic
development
Professional sportspersons such as David Alaba or Mirna Jukic,
the renowned authors Peter Handke or Thomas Glavinic,
the film director Michael Haneke, or the rapper Nazar do
all happen to have one thing in common apart from their
popularity: migration is part of their family history. Foreigners
make up a large proportion of people working in arts and
culture, professional sport, science and research. 15,412 foreign
citizens work in arts, entertainment and recreation (Statistics
Austria 2017b). 19,365 of 71,297 employed in this sector
have been born abroad. In scientific and technical activities,
such as legal and accounting activities, scientific research and
development or engineering activities, 30,375 persons have a
foreign citizenship and 39,058 are foreign-born. The majority
in both sectors are EU citizens (about 70%).
Artistic and cultural activities, theatre, film, music, fine arts
and literature are traditionally international. Mobility is due
to guest and festival performances, temporary engagements
and tours that form part of the everyday professional life.
More than half (56%) of actors, dancers and musicians in
eleven prominent theatres in Austria had a foreign citizenship
in 2013; the majority were Germans (19%) (MSNÖ 2013).
In the Viennese National Ballet, 104 dancers had altogether
27 different citizenships, and many came from Russia, Japan,
Slovakia or Hungary. 16% of 584 musicians in five well known
orchestras in Austria were foreigners; and the philharmonic
orchestra in Graz was the most international with 42%
foreign-orchestra musicians (ibid).
In professional football, seven out of 26 football players in the
national football squad in 2018 have a migrant background. In
2012, about 30% of the junior players in national league clubs
have a migrant background (ibid 2012). However, the granting
of Austrian citizenship in arts, sports and science as well as
economy is facilitated in case of extraordinary achievements
that are of particular interest for Austria (Citizenship Act §10).
Photo: Caritas Austria
24
the most part. Since there are significant numbers of Syrian
refugees in Austria, it is likely that Syrians will increasingly
get organised in the near future – also with the aim to support
their country of origin.
Waldrauch and Sohler (2004) show that the most important
activities for all surveyed migrants’ organisations in Vienna are
related to the maintenance of folklore and traditions (37%)
followed by the practice of religion (22%) as well as sports,
integration, education and intercultural understanding (9-
15%). For 4% the “help destined for countries of origin”,
and for one percent “development cooperation” (which is not
further defined) are among the three most important activities.
The percentage is higher among different diasporas: 9% of
the African organisations and 9% of the (Latin) American
organisations consider “development cooperation” as one of
the most important aspects of their engagement, while 9% of
organisations from former Yugoslavia see “help for countries of
origin” as one of the three most important activities. However,
they conclude that a typology of migrants’ organisations in
predominantly social, cultural or political organisations
targeting either the countries of origin or residence is not
possible since their activities are very diverse and can in fact be
better described as multi-sectorial and multi-functional.
Many migrants’ organisations are oriented towards both the
country of origin and Austria. “In addition, it has been shown
that an engagement towards the country of origin does not
exclude an engagement towards the country of immigration
but sometimes even encourages it.” (own translation, ibid
2004:39) Migrants’ organisations and diaspora networks can
become bridge builders between countries and regions and
work as transnational agents. In a globalised world “migrants
are both local and transnational actors.“ (Glick Schiller
2010:29)
Interview partners argued that many migrants’ organisations
and individuals in Austria might engage in development
activities but would not label their activities as such. At the
same time they were active in integration, intercultural
understanding and exchange. Many were sending economic
remittances (also collectively); they implemented activities in
the field of development education and awareness raising; they
realised charity work and social and socio-economic projects
and supported entrepreneurship in countries of origin taking
advantage of their transnational networks without considering
their activities as contributions to the development of their
countries of origin. Sometimes, even the term “remittances”
was unknown.
Alexandra König et al. (2015) found in a study on the
transnational engagement of 82 interviewees from Bosnia
and Herzegovina, India, the Philippines and Ukraine, mostly
residing in Austria, that their individual engagement in the
3.1.5 Migrants´ and diaspora
organisational presence and
contributions
Austria has a rich variety of migrants’ organisations19. There
are longstanding associations organised in federations
across Austria but also many small initiatives at local level
which are sometimes organised informally and mostly on a
voluntary basis. Despite the organisational presence of the
“new” migrants’ minorities since the 1960s, the literature is
scarce (Reiser 2009). Therefore, it is not possible to provide a
comprehensive overview on the number and size of migrants’
organisations and diaspora networks in Austria, even less when
it comes to their engagement in societies and communities in
the countries of origin (ibid; Fanizadeh 2014).
As has been shown for migrants’ organisations in Vienna
by Harald Waldrauch and Karin Sohler (2004), migrants
organise themselves mostly on a voluntary basis alongside
national or regional as well as ethnic and linguistic common
grounds, social and religious feelings of belonging or because
of cultural, economic, gender-specific, religious, political or
sports interests. Migrants have organised themselves already
for a long time in Austria. British citizens and anglophile
Austrians started the first football clubs in Austria in times
of the monarchy (Liegl and Spitaler 2008). Turkish students
on the one hand and Turkish workers on the other founded
the first migrants’ organisations of Turkish migrants already
in the 1960s. The study showed that the majority of the
active organisations at the time (46%) have a European origin
(including Turkey); 19% relate to the Asian continent; 11%
to African countries; 3% to (Latin) America, and 5% to
other regions or countries20. The region or country of origin
of the remaining 16% is unclear. Most migrant organisations
in Austria represent the main migrant groups present in the
country. People from Turkey and former Yugoslavia are the
mostly organised migrant groups in Vienna (Waldrauch and
Sohler 2004).
Migrants’ organisations from Afghanistan and Syria – the
main source countries of recent refugee movements to Austria
– became more present since a few years with the Afghan
community becoming more organised than the Syrian one,
which is due to the fact that Afghans have been in Austria for
a longer period. Within the Afghan diaspora, which includes
also very young people who came to Austria as unaccompanied
minors, there are cultural associations, network circles,
and other initiatives, which engage in charity work and
development activities (for example in education or vocational
training). As the situation in Syria is still very unstable and
rebuilding / development engagement is not really possible,
the Syrian community concentrates on integration issues for
25
3.2.1 Economic remittances
Economic remittances are personal, well-targeted transfers
from migrants to families and friends in order to sustain
their livelihood and to alleviate situations of hardship (illness,
unemployment, occupational accidents, ageing); they are
“(social) risk spreading and co-insurance livelihood strategies”
(De Haas 2010:18) pursued by households. The meaning of
economic remittances for developing regions is enormous.
In 2018, global remittance flows to low- and middle-income
countries (LMICs) are estimated to reach $528 billion, which is
an increase of 10.8% compared to the year before (World Bank
2018). Drawing from international studies, it is estimated that
about 15% of the annual income is sent to countries of origin,
while the majority is contributed to the countries of residence
(IFAD 2017; UN 2018); however, transfer rates differ among
countries (Obrovsky 2016).
Those personal transfers are furthermore used for child care,
education (school fees), health care (of older and/or sick
persons), clearing debts, and even in coping with climateinduced disasters and humanitarian crises. König et al.
(2015) showed in their study on the contribution of migrants
residing in Austria towards their countries of origin (Bosnia
and Herzegovina, India, Philippines, and Ukraine) that
approximately two thirds of the respondents were sometimes
or even regularly sending remittances, mainly to parents,
siblings and other relatives but also to charity and religious
organisations. Furthermore, collective remittances were
collected in cases of disaster such as the Typhoon in the
Philippines or heavy floods in Bosnia and Herzegovina as well
as conflicts in the Ukraine.
Economic remittances are also sometimes utilised for
entrepreneurship, to support a business activity or to feed into
a bigger investment or project as has been shown above. While
international organisations highlighted the development
potential of remittances, researchers emphasise that economic
remittances will not solve structural constraints and point
rather to “the failure of states’ policies” (De Haas 2010:18).
According to Hein de Haas (2010) states and international
institutions play an important role in shaping conditions for
social and economic development. The latter was echoed also
by Austrian stakeholders: remittances are primarily private
funds that should not be instrumentalised by governments.
Furthermore, economic remittances do not only flow towards
migrants’ countries of origin but also on a large scale in the
opposite direction towards the countries of residence.
regions of origin is numerous and does not only refer to social
and political projects by migrants’ organisations or individuals
but often involve entrepreneurship and economic projects.
There are also very lively African communities spread over several
federal states (“Bundesländer”) in Austria, and several organised
groups do define their initiatives explicitly as “migration
and development” work. Some migrants’ organisations
are organised as twin societies between Austrians and the
respective nationality as is the case for Uganda and Nigeria.
The societies aim at establishing, supporting and improving
relationships between the countries of origin and Austria;
they sometimes collect money and use it for a specific project.
3.2 Towards regions and countries
of origin and shared responsibility
Transnational engagements towards regions and countries
of origin are very diverse. Due to the enormous volume
of economic remittances exceeding Official Development
Aid (ODA), there has been a strong focus on economic
aspects in the discussions on migrants’ contribution and
their transnational networks to countries of origin in the
past years. Remittances are (additional) household income
generated in foreign economies by people either temporarily or
permanently moving to those economies including “funds and
non-cash items sent or given by individuals who have migrated
to a new economy and become residents there, and the net
compensation of border, seasonal, or other short-term workers
who are employed in an economy in which they are not
resident.” (IMF 2008:272) Economic remittances are clearly
one of the most tangible signs of how migrants contribute to the
development in countries of origin. However, besides economic
remittances, direct investments, entrepreneurship and other
economic projects, migrants contribute either individually or
organised in associations, initiatives or platforms in multiple
ways depending on their personal resources. A study on
highly skilled Egyptian migrants in Austria found that besides
sending remittances, one third stated to engage or have
engaged in transnational activities such as charity work (e.g.
sending medicine), activities to transfer knowledge through
lectures, workshops or YouTube videos, business development
and political engagement (Bacchi 2016).
26
Remittances can be seen as contributions to development and
welfare in countries of origin, many of which are important
economic partners for Austria. In 2015, about 38% were going
to the so-called developing regions, referring to countries
recorded by the DAC list of recipients of Official Development
Assistance (ODA). However, only a minor part was flowing to
the poorest countries worldwide (Obrovsky 2016). According
to Michael Obrovsky (2016:96) the impact of remittances on
poverty alleviation in the poorest countries is therefore rather
low.
a. Remittances sent from Austria
According to the Bilateral Remittances Matrix of the World
Bank (2017), a total of $4,083 million was sent abroad from
Austria in 2017. As one can see from Figure 4, major amounts
of remittances are sent to EU countries, which is due to the
fact that the main migrant groups in Austria are from the
EU. About 60% of the out-going remittances were sent to
European countries, and 40% to third countries. The highest
amount was sent to Germany with $834 million in 2017
followed by Hungary ($384 million). For other main migrant
groups in Austria such as Turkish migrants and those from the
Balkan region remittances are also high: with $379 million
sent to Serbia, $193 million sent to Bosnia-Herzegovina and
$54 million sent to Turkey. Nigeria and Egypt are the only
countries on the African continent that receive quite high
amounts of remittances from Austria. Several countries in
Asia (namely China, Philippines and India) also receive a
remarkable share of remittances from the country.
Figure 4: Remittances sent from Austria in million USD in 2017 (countries receiving over 30 mn . USD)
Source: own graph, data: World Bank, Migration and Remittances Data, Bilateral Remittances Matrix
POLAND
CHINA
FRANCE
BOSNIA-HERZEG.
NIGERIA
CZECH REPUBLIC
PHILIPPINES
ITALY
EGYPT
CROATIA
ROMANIA
SLOVAK REPUBLIC
SERBIA
HUNGARY
GERMANY 834
SWITZERLAND
KOSOVO
INDIA
MONTENEGRO
SPAIN
THAILAND
SLOVENIA
BELGIUM
TURKEY
384
59
70
72
73
84
85
34
35
37
46
49
54
105
109
114
193
194
294
379
109
112
114
27
b. Remittances received by Austria
A total amount of $2,934 million was sent to Austria in 2017
representing a substantial contribution the Austrian economy.
The highest amount of remittances received by people
residing in Austria came from Germany ($1,102 million)
in 2017, followed by Switzerland ($362 million), the USA
($306 million), Canada ($133 million) and Australia ($121
million). Substantial amounts of remittances to Austria also
came from European countries such as the UK, France, Italy,
Spain, Slovenia, Hungary, and the Netherlands as well as from
Turkey. About 71% from European countries and 29% were
coming from third countries. As one can see from Figure 5
major amounts of remittances came from Canada, Australia
and Turkey. In general, since 2008 out-going remittances
from Austria substantially exceed in-coming remittances also
because the share of foreign-born residents in Austria has
increased (Obrovsky 2016).
Figure 5: Remittances received by Austria in million USD (starting from 20 mn. USD) in 2017
Source:
 own graph, data: World Bank, Migration and Remittances Data, Bilateral Remittances Matrix
ITALY
FRANCE
UNITED KINGDOM
TURKEY
AUSTRALIA
CANADA
SWEDEN
SERBIA
NETHERLANDS
HUNGARY
SLOVENIA
SPAIN
UNITED STATES
SWITZERLAND
GERMANY 1102
CZECH REPUBLIC
ISRAEL
BELGIUM
POLAND
362
26
28
29
32
36
38
22
48
51
86
117
121
133
306
54
68
70
28
Looking at the regions, one can see that most outward FDI
goes to the EU-28 followed by other European countries, while
only very limited outward direct investments go to Oceania
and Africa. Most outward direct investments are invested in
financial intermediation, followed by professional, scientific
and technical services; trade; chemicals, petroleum products
and pharmaceuticals; real estate activities, and agriculture and
mining. Furthermore, outward direct investments from Austria
go into the wood, paper and printing industry; manufacture
of transport equipment; and metals and fabricated metal
products (OeNB 2017).
3.2.2 Outward foreign direct
investments
In past decades, foreign direct investment (FDI) has increased
very fast; however, only until recently has FDI taken place
in large parts of the developing world. Outward FDI are
the value of direct investments made by the residents of the
reporting economy to foreign economies21. Since there is
no data available on migrants’ share on outward FDI from
Austria towards the countries of origin, this chapter only
includes larger investments usually referring to financial
assets flowing from resident investors in Austria to direct
investment enterprises abroad (in the form of equity subsidies
or intra-company loans). FDIs are different from other
forms of economic investments as they only classify as such
when at least 10% of the voting capital is acquired (OeNB
n.d.). In addition, it has to be highlighted that the effects of
FDI towards the countries of origin, and their potential to
generate “spillover effects” (enhancing technology, know-how
and managerial skills of local companies), and to increase
investments, employment, and other local added value cannot
be generalised and depends very much on the specific context
(as has been shown for the apparel industry in Sub-Saharan
Africa by Staritz and Frederick 2016).
Figure 6: Outward direct investment positions broken down by region in 2017
Source: own graph, data: Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB)
AFRICA
OCEANIA
NEAR EAST
ASIA
20 000
40 000
60 000
80 000
100 000
120 000
140 000
160 000
AMERICA
REST OF EUROPE
EU-28
719
2 213
5 456
14 852
16 701
24 061
141 317
0
29
in transnational networks and local communities. Social
remittances, a term coined in the late 1990s, refer to “ideas,
behaviours, identities, and social capital [or in other words:
opportunities arising from relationships between individuals,
within groups or social networks] that flow from receiving- to
sending-country communities.” (Levitt 1998:926) Migrants
can be bridge builders and translators and can sometimes reinterpret and re-formulate ideas and concepts contributing to
“(both) powerful (negative and positive) change.” (Lacroix et
al. 2016:2) However, legal and socioeconomic conditions have
a strong influence on the circulation of social remittances (ibid
2016:2ff.). It was highlighted by Peter Evans (1996) that social
remittances do not just move in one direction and that they
cannot always be seen as positive, which could be confirmed
in the Austrian context. The qualitative part of the research
has provided two examples of what social remittances could
be in the Austrian context and of how migrants contribute to
shaping the countries of origin through them.
The first example referred to migrants’ organisations in the
Turkish diaspora which is per se very heterogeneous, and
approaches of organised groups within the diaspora might differ
or even oppose each other especially when there is a political
and/or religious orientation involved. Some associations are
highly influenced by Turkey and one interviewee said that
values, concepts and political orientations are “imported into
Austria” supporting traditionalist and conservative policies,
and thereby supporting illiberal tendencies in Turkey. The
participation of Turkish nationals living in Austria at the last
election in June 2018 seems to confirm this point: 70% of
those who were eligible to vote from Austria gave their vote to
the current president – a much better outcome than in Turkey.
The reason for the high approval can be explained to a high
extent by the social origin of the Turkish nationals migrating
in the course of the guest-worker system according to experts.
They are located mainly in the conservative milieu (Wiener
Zeitung 2018a).
The research for the report at hand also provided positive
examples of ‘social remittances’. Looking at the AustrianUgandan Friendship Association, individuals engaged in all
kind of activities, which can be seen as ‘social remittances’: A
primary school teacher did not teach in Uganda, but offered
her knowledge to friends and family who teach in schools –
so she remitted methods and didactics formerly unknown
to her fellow nationals. An office manager told her friends
in Uganda about methods used at the UN to manage time
and workload. In doing so, she was offering new impulses and
interventions that could potentially be used by her friends
for their own working environment and context. The son of
a farmer regularly met with the community back home to
discuss developments in the agriculture sector. He did not act
as a farmer himself, but he transferred knowledge and assisted
in building up a network between farmers, which was a new
practice. Many other positive examples of social remittances
3.2.3 Socio-economic investments
Investments in the countries of origin of migrants working
and living in Austria sometimes have a private nature and
sometimes target whole communities. In a study on migrants
from Bosnia and Herzegovina, India, the Philippines and
the Ukraine residing mainly in Austria about three quarters
reported to invest or have invested in their country of origin.
Many used the investments for property, renovating houses
or flats or for education and trainings; only a few invested
into businesses (König et al. 2015). Reasons for setting up
businesses were reported as “means to generate income, but also
[…] to safeguard their independence, maintain transnational
social ties and realise their personal ambitions or householdrelated projects and positively contribute to the region’s
transformation.” (ibid 2015:52) Besides sending remittances
African migrant health workers in Austria also supported their
family members with other forms of financial backing to invest
in businesses or infrastructure (e.g. construction of houses or
wells) (Wojczewski et al. 2015). Social impact investments are
defined by OECD (2015:74) as investments “in a social area,
targeting beneficiaries in need. […] (T)he good provided should
have a mix of public and private good characteristics […], the
investor should […] have return expectations above or equal to
zero.” However, an overview on socio-economic initiatives or
projects from migrants’ organisations or individuals in Austria
targeting the countries of origin is missing.
JOADRE is an example of a socio-economic project by Joana
Adesuwa Reiterer who opened her first boutique in Nigeria
when she was nineteen years old. She organised several fashion
events for the film and entertainment industry in Lagos and
transferred her business to Austria in 2003. However, Joana
did not only engage in business activities but founded the
NGO Exit in Vienna with the aim to fight trafficking and
trade of African women. As a core activity in the fight against
human trafficking she initiated a series of awareness raising
campaigns in the German speaking countries, and in 2011 she
implemented the NAWA Festival – an awareness raising event
in Nigeria and six European countries – in cooperation with
the United Nations Office on Drug and Crime (UNODC)
and the International Organisation for Migration (IOM).
Joadre aims at creating economic prospects for vulnerable
groups using entrepreneurship within the fashion and
accessory industry. They aim to connect African producers to
the global marketplace.
3.2.4 Social remittances
Whereas economic remittances, foreign direct investments and
socio-economic investments manifest the economic connection
of migrants in the countries of origin, it ignores that migrants
are not merely economic but also political and societal agents
30
3.2.5 Engagement in/for society
and community
The engagement in the countries of origin (either as
individuals or through organisations) can be very diverse as
has been shown above. In the case of migrants’ organisations
this has to do with the fact that many initiatives organise
informally (especially at the beginning) and have low levels
of institutionalisation. Examples of organisations engaging
in and for society and the communities in the countries of
origin that have been mentioned by interviewed stakeholders
are outlined throughout the report. It becomes obvious that
their activities refer not only to their countries of origin but
also to the Austrian society; including activities in the field
of integration and intercultural understanding and exchange,
towards the countries of origin can be found in Bacchi (2016),
König et al. (2015), and Wojczewski et al. (2015). It becomes
evident that social remittances can support to engage, either
individually or through organisations, in the society and local
communities in the countries of origin.
Photo: Jork Weismann
31
The objective of ADEPT – the Africa-Europe Diaspora
Development Platform is to improve the capacity and impact
of African diaspora organisations involved in development
activities in Africa. They try to optimise development
engagement in Africa, professionalise organisations and
activities, create effective partnerships between Europe
and Africa as well as influence the policy and practice of
development cooperation. The representative of ADEPT
Austria (and chairman of the association Radio Afrika TV, see
Chapter 6) said that politicians often lack an understanding of
the diaspora being a valuable resource for the development in
the countries of origin; therefore the association visited Senegal
to lobby for the diaspora to be more present in the parliament.
Kenya was visited as well to start a process to lower the transfer
costs of remittances. The work of the ADEPT platform (on a
European level) and of Radio Afrika TV (in Austria) covers a
huge variety of activities; for example the project “sponsorship
Mediterranean”. Media partners and young people collect
innovative business ideas with the objective to invest in the
best ones after a selection process.
An example for migrants’ engagement in countries of conflict
and protracted crises comes from the Afghan community in
Austria. The Afghan Cultural Association AKIS and the
relief organisation Jugend Eine Welt – Don Bosco Action
cooperated to build a school for children living on the street
in Kabul. Together they supported a girls’ school in 2016/17
and managed to include about thirty children living on
the street in their teaching lessons. Next to basic education
also vocational training (e.g. courses on sewing and metal
working) was offered in the school. Besides activities in
the field of education, they provided shoes, clothes, school
books and other school material, and at least one meal a
day for the children. They planned to extend the capacity of
the school to 100 places but due to a lack of funding AKIS
development education and awareness raising. Activities in the
countries of origin range from charity work and social projects
in the field of education and income-generating activities (also
in situations of conflicts), the promotion of transnational
exchange of expert knowledge, advocacy work (e.g. for lower
transfer costs of remittances) to activities in the field of human
rights observation. Others promote entrepreneurship in the
countries of origin (see chapter 5).
Barka Barka is a small Austrian initiative supporting the
province of Ioba in Burkina Faso in West Africa through
fundraising activities, charity events and cooperation with
other development actors. They organised new school desks
for the local school in Foroteon, a small village located in the
Southwest together with the association HILFE DIREKT.
From 2013 to 2015 they started a project to help women
produce shea butter. Women have very limited possibilities
to secure an income in the village, so the project aimed at
increasing the household-income of 72 women to guarantee
better nutrition and health of their families. In cooperation
with the Vienna Institute for International Dialogue and
Cooperation (VIDC), a fruit press was purchased in order to
guarantee the sustainability of the project.
The Austrian-Nigerian Initiative (A-NI)is a NGO that aims
to initiate economical, educational, and cultural development
projects between Austria and Nigeria and supports the
transnational exchange of expert knowledge from Austria
to Nigeria. The organisation wants to improve intercultural
awareness and understanding by offering the possibility for
interested Austrians and descendants of emigrated Nigerians
to reside in Nigeria for a certain period of time. A-NI offers
support all along the journey to anyone interested in going to
Nigeria. However, they do engage in the Nigerian community
in the same way as they support the contact with Austrians.
Photo: Radio Afrika TV
32
bring skills, know-how, and financial means that have a
positive impact on the development of their country of origin.
However, this can hardly be generalised since their possibility
to contribute depends highly on qualifications, individual
experiences and more generally speaking the individual social
background.
One personal story of a migrant from Ghana was told by Dr.
Bella Bello Bitugu, an educationist and sociologist with special
focus on development and change living in Austria for more
than fifteen years. Bitugu taught at the University of Innsbruck
and at the University of Krems in Austria. He was the first
African referee in Austria and some of his past professional
experiences and achievements included many positions23. His
will to engage more directly in Ghana inspired him to return
to his country of origin. In 2012 and 2013, Bitugu served
as the Country Manager of “Right to Play Ghana”, part of
“Right To Play International” which is the biggest “sport for
development” organisation in the world. Since October 2013,
he is directing the Sports Directorate of the University of
Ghana.
Lisa Akesson (2001) challenged the central assumption that
returnees might use their skills acquired in the EU to engage in
the development of their country of origin through the example
of returnees to Cap Verde. She showed that most returnees –
often in low-level jobs accompanied by discrimination – did
not consider that their acquired skills in a foreign country help
them build a new live. Returnees are a very heterogenous group
with regard to educational, cultural and social backgrounds.
Some had no education in their country of origin and/or were
not able to work in an adequate position in the countries of
residence; others are well educated with a professional career.
In addition, the context of return – if it was on a voluntary
basis or forced – matters (Heilemann and Lukits 2017).
According to Austrian stakeholders, challenges with regard to
the reintegration in the country of origin increasingly occur
when persons cannot make advantage of their residence in
Austria in terms of gaining additional capacities, skills or
working experience. This is especially the case for asylum
seekers with a negative final decision on the asylum application
who had to experience long waiting periods in the asylum
procedure without access to the labour market, even leading
to skills’ losses. Low qualified returnees also face difficulties
returning to the countries of origin. Their potential to engage
in development is very limited since they are mainly focused
on sustaining their livelihood in their country of origin where
they sometimes have to start from the beginning. Besides
support structures for returnees in some countries of origin are
weak or unknown and returnees are rarely seen as development
actors – “even if they have the capacity to act as such” as one
interviewee mentioned.
cannot realise this plan for the time being. The founder of
the organisation stated that there was a turn in Austria after
2015/16 from supporting small development initiatives such as
his own towards the common aim to mitigate migration flows
(not exclusively, but also through development initiatives).
According to Ghousudden Mir, a long-term investment in
education in Afghanistan would be beneficial – especially for
girls – “to support people in their own country so that they
are not forced to migrate”.22 This seems especially interesting
given the fragile context in Afghanistan and the highly
debated issue of returns to Afghanistan. Aurvasi Patel (2018),
vice director of UNHCR Afghanistan said at a conference in
early 2018 in Vienna that the security situation in Afghanistan
has worsened drastically in the past few years causing record
numbers of civilian causalities, especially in Kabul, an increase
in violence, and a rise in forced displacement in every region.
Humanitarian response is becoming less and less frequent due
to the limited access to areas of conflict.
The initiatives HASCO - Help Afghan School Children and
Austrian-Afghan society follow similar approaches addressing
the need for education and basic infrastructure in schools in
Afghanistan. While HASCO delivered school material to
the Ariana Lycée and other material like drawing books to
the kindergarten of the same institutions, the Austria-Afghan
society installed heating systems in a kindergarten in Kabul.
On a small scale this activity supports development objectives;
however efforts are limited due to the worsening of security.
In the East and South of Afghanistan schools have been
attacked and had to close. Other activities by the AustrianAfghan society include the support of a music project in the
capital of Afghanistan, which was implemented through the
art faculty of the university in Kabul. Within the last project
approximately 200 instruments were brought to Kabul.
A very different activity but also in the area of engagement
in and for the society is realised by the association
Guatemala Solidarity Austria. They are part of the project
ACOGUATE, a project on human rights observation in
Guatemala. The project is implemented in coordination
with a local Guatemalan human rights organisation “Centro
de Acción Legal en Derechos Humanos” and the witnesses’
association “Asociación por la Justicia y Reconciliación”. Part
of the project’s activities is to accompany witnesses in trials
against former political leaders accused of human rights
violations and genocide and to offer protection and support to
witnesses. People from Guatemala living in Austria are part of
the association.

3.2.6 Returnees contributions
Recent discussions have looked at the role of returnees in
the development process in their countries of origin. Some
examples in the Austrian context showed that returnees
33
4.1 Labour market in Austria
Migrant workers constitute an important share of the work force
in Austria. Labour migration is highly regulated as will be shown
below. Whereas migrants from EU countries work in different
sectors, European and other third-country nationals work above
average in the lower end of the skills’ spectrum, often in lowwage sectors. Discrimination is a challenge that influences the
position of migrants on the Austrian labour market. There are
pay gaps and discrimination in recruitment (e.g. when a name
sounds foreign and/or is associated with a certain nationality) as
well as within companies (e.g. when it comes to internal further
education) (Hofer et al. 2013; Ertl 2011). An important
obstacle to fully realising the development contributions of
migrants working in certain low wage and higher risk sectors
in Austria – and their contributions to the countries of origin
— is discriminatory treatment at work, faced by migrants,
both from elsewhere in the EU and from other countries.
Opportunities and obstacles for migrants to contribute to
Austrian society and to engage for the development in the
countries of origin refer to policies and their implementation
here and elsewhere. Their contributions depend on their
possibilities to access institutionalised social spheres - such as
the labour market among others - and to establish secure and
stable living conditions in Austria as will be shown below. This
is also a precondition for migrants to engage in activities in the
countries of origin.
According to the Migrant Integration Policy Index (MIPEX)24,
a country index and study on 38 countries including all
EU-countries, Austria’s integration policies “create as many
opportunities as obstacles for non-EU immigrants to fully
participate in society” (MIPEX 2015: para.2); most countries
provide better possibilities for becoming a citizen, for family
reunification, and fighting discrimination. In 2015, Austria
ranked place 20 out of 38 countries, and place 14 out of the
EU-28. As a cross-cutting issue, integration embraces all social
spheres addressing newcomers as well as the local population
and institutions aiming at a peaceful and respectful living
together .
Due to the range of relevant policies for migrants and the great
heterogeneity of the group itself, the section provides a brief
overview on the access to, and the protection and treatment of
migrant workers in the Austrian labour market, the access to
a secure residence status and the general climate and attitudes
towards migrants in Austria. In addition, there is a focus on
migrants and their organisations contributing to the countries
of origin.
- chapter 4 -
OBSTACLES THAT IMPEDE MIGRANTS
FULL CONTRIBUTIONS TO DEVELOPMENT
Photo: Caritas Austria
34
a. Refugees and beneficiaries of
subsidiary protection
Recognised refugees and beneficiaries of subsidiary protection
are not subject to employment permits and they enjoy
unrestricted access to the Austrian labour market. Nonetheless,
it is important to highlight that people granted international
protection face more challenges to access the labour market.
Therefore, specific and needs-oriented integration measures to
an increasing heterogeneity (in terms of countries of origin,
educational attainments, financial resources, family situation)
of refugees are needed (OECD 2016), all of which was debated
in Austria in the course of the refugee movements in 2015/16.
In recent years the integration of refugees became a very
dominant topic in Austria with a focus on labour market
measures, language, and cultural orientation leading to the
Integration Act (IntG) in 2017, the Integration Year Act (IJG)
and the harmonisation of integration measures for thirdcountry nationals, recognised refugees and persons granted
subsidiary protection. The Integration Act (IntG) is the first
central framework for integration, defined as a process relating
to the society as a whole demanding the active contribution of
every person in Austria, particularly of migrants and of all state
institutions at national, federal state and community level.
The Integration Act (IntG) binds legal claims for integration
measures (e.g. language courses) to duties and sanction
mechanisms. Recognised refugees and persons granted
subsidiary protection (15 years and older) must sign now the
“Integration Declaration”, immediately after the recognition
of their protection status. The declaration demands a German
language level of A2 among others, including sanctions in
case of non-compliance, resulting in cutting social assistance,
the last social net support for persons who have not been
sufficiently entitled into the social security system (basically
through employment) in Austria. For refugees and persons
granted subsidiary protection it is hardly possible to reach the
minimum social security entitlements which allow access to
the benefits of the unemployment security.
At the time of preparing this report, a new Social Assistance
Act is under way which refrains fundamentally from the former
needs-based minimum benefit system (“Bedarfsorientierte
Mindestsicherung”); the former minimum standards shall
be replaced by nation-wide maximum amount with hardly
defining any floors. Especially people granted international
protection shall clearly receive a less favourable treatment.
While people granted subsidiary protection shall only be
entitled to a very limited amount – about the same as asylum
seekers (despite the recognition of their protection needs by
the state), the access shall be generally linked to very high
integration-policy objectives (affecting first and foremost
recognized refugees). In order to receive the normal social
4.1.1 Access to the labour market
linked to residence status
Access to the labour market is determined by the country
of origin and the fact of being subject to a residence or work
permit. While EU-/EFTA-citizens (except Croatians)25, who
represent more than half of the foreign labour force (59%),
enjoy freedom of movement, third-country nationals can only
live and work in Austria under certain conditions (e.g. labour
market testing) regulated by immigration laws replacing
the former guest-worker model. Third-country migration
was restricted since the 1990s in the context of Austria’s
EU membership, and since the early 2000s it was limited
to highly skilled migrants (differentiated by skill level and
period of residence) including a “selective family reunification
regime” (König et al. 2015:51) and an increase mobility from
third-country students (Biffl 2017; Bittmann 2013). Due
to an increased demand for skilled labour, a point system
called “Red-White-Red Card” (RWR-Card)26 for (highly)
skilled third-country nationals (introduced in 2011) has been
amended several times. For third-country nationals the access
to the labour market is basically tied to one employer and one
sector; however, family migrants have been granted full access
in 2011. The access to trade licenses is a potential obstacle for
third-country entrepreneurs unlike in most other countries
(MIPEX 2015).
According to a study on labour migration from third countries,
high percentages of third-country nationals working below
their educational and skills level suggest that there is demand
for low skilled labour in Austria although there is no public
discussion on this issue (Gächter et al. 2015). In addition,
MIPEX (2015:para.5) stated in 2015 that Austria generates
“brain waste” of highly educated non-EU citizens due to a
lack of recognition of skills and qualifications received abroad,
and less access to trainings and study grants. The Law on
Recognition and Assessment of Qualifications (AuBG) in 2016
should address these challenges by facilitating the procedures;
increasing most needed counselling, and widening the offer
of information. In addition, flexible processes were introduced
especially for refugees who cannot access documents.
Contrary to other European countries like Germany, the
labour market in Austria is strongly restricted for persons
seeking international protection and it demands different
administrative procedures. In 2018, the Austrian government
abolished the possibility for young asylum seekers to start an
apprenticeship education (“Lehre”) in shortage occupations
(Der Standard 2018a). Ever since, asylum seekers can only
enter the labour market via seasonal work in agriculture,
forestry or tourism27. In addition, asylum seekers can become
self-employed in certain fields of employment.
35
Of particular importance is strong anti-discrimination
legislation that should apply to all migrants although it does
not expressly mention nationality/national origin as prohibited
grounds:
“The Austrian Equal Treatment Act prohibits any direct or
indirect form of discrimination in connection with employment
(and since 2011 also in connection with other legal relationships)
due to gender, age, racial or ethnic origin, religion or belief, or
sexual orientation. Discrimination based on these grounds is
explicitly prohibited with respect to hiring, working conditions,
compensation, fringe benefits, promotion, education and training,
as well as termination. The Equal Treatment Act also prohibits
sexual harassment by employers and third parties and regulates the
consequences of such behaviour (including consequences upon failure
of the employer to prevent sexual harassment by third parties).” (ibid)
However, significant gaps remain in protections for foreign
workers and migration governance provisions in national law
as Austria has ratified none of the four main international
conventions that provide specific delineation of the rights of
migrant workers and their families and model provisions for
governance of migration for employment. These are the 1990
International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of
All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families; ILO
Convention 97 on migration for employment (ratified by
a dozen other EU members states); ILO Convention 143
on migrant workers (supplemental provisions), and ILO
Convention 189 on Decent Work for Domestic Workers,
ratified to date by seven EU member states including Germany
and Italy, as well as by Switzerland.
a. Treatment of migrant workers in low
wage and higher risk sectors
While Austria generally has a strong labour legislation based
on international standards, poor treatment of migrant workers
in certain low wage and higher risk sectors appears to reflect
inadequate or absent application and enforcement of labour
standards and occupational safety and health protections.
Labour inspection does not reach some workplaces where
migrants are employed. A number of studies in the 2000s
(International Metalworkers’ Federation 2009; Hofer et
al. 2013; Hollan and Danaj 2018) found discriminatory
practices and poor treatment especially in low paid and low
skilled occupations, where many migrant workers – of both
European and third country origin – are concentrated.
assistance, affected persons have to demonstrate even higher
German language levels than within the “Integration
Declaration”. A German language level of B1 (or an English
language level of C1) is required; otherwise the social assistance
shall be cut by 35%. Despite the fact that this counteracts
the original objectives of preventing and eradicating poverty,
it does not take into account practicalities of learning a new
language and the heterogeneity of the more vulnerable group of
persons entitled to international protection. Linguistic features
of languages (diversity of linguistic families, different writing
systems), educational backgrounds and learning habits, and
the age of language learners all play a role (Blaschitz et al. 2019).
The relatively new Integration Year Act (IJG) aims to
facilitate long-term labour market integration of recognised
refugees and people granted subsidiary protection and
asylum seekers (Spiegelfeld 2018) “according to available
financial and organisatory resources” (Integration Year
Act §1). However, the enforcement of the Integration Year
Act (IJG) has been extremely limited due to cuts in social
spending for labour market integration measures in 2018
affecting vulnerable groups, especially recognised refugees
(Wiener Zeitung 2018c). In addition, the integration
budget for schools has been reduced (Der Standard 2018b).


4.1.2 Legal protection and
treatment of migrant workers
Austria has an extensive framework of labour law and an
enforcement system that in principle applies to the protection
of all foreigners employed in the country. Austrian labour law
and its enforcement through labour inspection are largely
based on International Labour Standards, known as ILO
Conventions and Recommendations. Austria has ratified all 8
fundamental conventions, 3 of 4 priority governance conventions,
and a total of 43 International Labour Conventions are in
force in Austria28. All of these international labour standards
generally apply to all migrant workers regardless of status.
The Austrian Labour Constitutional Act sets out the general
rules for the relationship between employer and employee
while the Austrian General Civil Code (ABGB) provides
the legal basis for employment contracts. The employment
of foreign employees in Austria is regulated in the Act on the
Employment of Foreign Workers. A new Code on Combating
the Dumping of Wages and Social Services (LSD-BG) was
enacted in 2017 with provisions that regulate the transfer of
employees from abroad to Austria, such as posted workers,
among others (Boller 2018). Austrian labour law provides for
and regulates legally binding collective bargaining agreements
between employer and employee organisations for a broad
range of industrial and services sectors.
36
Regarding posted workers, the POOSH study by Katarina
Hollan and Sonila Danaj (2018:2) above emphasises that their
temporary migration status has an impact on their situation
in several ways:
“firstly, employers pay less attention in terms of OSH
[occupational safety and health] training towards them;
secondly, their temporary status marks them as workers who
are easier to exploit and to coerce into accepting unsatisfactory
working/OSH conditions; thirdly, it also influences posted
workers’ behaviour in so far as due to their short-termed stay,
they tend not to inform themselves sufficiently about their
rights and the regulations in Austria.”
The report highlights that especially posted workers in
low skill sectors from lower-income countries are “highly
dependent on the income they receive in Austria” (ibid
2018:15); therefore they often agree to work more than the
legal maximum working hours (per day, per week or per
month) and accept dangerous working conditions. “Thirdcountry nationals are in an even more vulnerable situation.
Their stay in the European Union depends on a valid
work visa, often from the sending country, so they become
particularly dependent on their employers.” (ibid 218:2)
4.2 Legal security regarding the
residence status
The access to a secure residence status is very difficult in Austria
compared to other European countries. While EU-/EFTAcitizens enjoy a visa-free regime and the right to reside in
Austria due to the agreements on the free movement of people
(for three months and thereafter with minor restrictions),
Austria’s requirements for permanent residence and accessing
the citizenship are among the most restrictive in Europe
and “do not take into account immigrants’ real efforts to
participate in society to the best of their individual abilities and
their local circumstances.” (MIPEX 2015:para.4) Insecurities
with regard to the residence status often lead to feelings of
personal insecurity (König et al. 2915; UNHCR 2015). While
permanent residence offers better integration opportunities for
migrants, legal conditions for long-term residents in Austria
are more insecure, and naturalisation policies are among the
strictest in Europe (MIPEX 2015).
a. Permanent residence
Permanent residents can work, study and live in Austria with the
same rights as Austrian citizens except political rights. About
42% of third-country nationals were holding a permanent
residence title (Permanent Residence – EU title) as per January
An international survey by the International Metalworkers’
Federation (2009) including input from its Austrian
affiliate, the national federation, found common
concerns regarding the treatment of migrant workers
and that are found throughout the metalwork industries:
•	 Common methods of employing migrant workers
are found to be precarious (i.e. due to temporary
contracts). In Austria, foreign workers are directly hired
by an employer on temporary contracts; the obligatory
employment authorisation (including a labour market
testing) is limited to one year and bound to one employer.
Only after a certain period can this be changed to a work
permit with free choice of employers.
•	 Wages paid to migrant workers are generally less than for
local workers in similar jobs. Although collective contracts
in Austria apply to all employees, pay gaps are reported
between Austrian and foreign workers. Therefore, an
important union objective is to ensure equal pay and
conditions for migrant workers and thereby prevent
social dumping. Also Hofer et al. (2013) found pay gaps;
however, differences were reported to be smaller.
•	 The unionisation rate of migrant workers is extremely
low. The biggest obstacles are that migrant workers are
afraid of joining a union and they are not aware of their
rights; in addition, language and cultural barriers play a
role which is addressed by the Austrian union through
different offers.
Photo: Fancycrave
37
wait 10 years before they can apply for the citizenship (before it
was 6 years) leading to a worsening of their legal position. The
requirements for language proficiency, lawful conduct, income
and the costs of the procedures are among the most difficult
in Europe (e.g. in 2006 a citizenship test has been introduced,
and in 2011 the language level for obtaining the citizenship
has been risen to B1 as mentioned above) (MIPEX 2015).
Unlike in most countries in Europe, new Austrian citizens
have to give up their former citizenship which is one of the
reasons why naturalisation rates are low. Dual citizenship is
only possible in exceptional cases. Third-country nationals
who become citizens are mostly migrants who have already
been born in Austria (“2nd generation”) and long-term
migrants, mostly from low- to medium-developed countries
and who mainly arrived in Austria via family reunification or
seeking international protection (ibid).
c. Legal security for recognised refugees
Besides the restricted access for recognised refugees to Austrian
citizenship there have been further limitations for the group
with regard to the residence status in recent years. In 2016,
“temporary asylum” was introduced: Since then, beneficiaries
of refugee status are no longer granted an unlimited right of
residence (which was of course nullified if there were grounds
for withdrawing refugee status) but only one that is limited to
a period of three years. After three years, it is extended to an
unlimited period if the status is not withdrawn.
Legal insecurities are prevailing for beneficiaries of subsidiary
protection. Since 2014, their protection status and hence
residence permit is issued for one year and has to be renewed
thereafter every second year (Asylum Act §8).
Time restrictions can lead to general insecurities causing
enormous psychological stress. In addition, this group
faces challenges to access housing and employment but also
in other ordinary service contracts (e.g. internet access,
mobile contracts) due to their insecure residence status
leading to precarious living conditions in Austria and
further hampering the integration process (UNHCR 2015).
2017 that is only eligible to people residing longer than five
years in Austria without interruptions, 25% were holding even
more time-restricted residence or settlement titles, and the rest
were either asylum seekers, recognised refugees (who need no
residence title), seasonal workers or others (Statistics Austria
and KMI 2017).
According to MIPEX (2015), eligible residents are facing
“some of the most restrictive conditions to become permanent
residents” - unlike in most Western European countries -
which probably keeps many long-term residents from applying
for permanent residence; the permanent residence status is in
addition more insecure compared to most countries because it
is only issued for five years and has to be renewed thereafter (in
27 countries no renewal demanded). Furthermore, applicants
can be rejected and permits withdrawn due to several reasons
without options for judicial review. “And without the security
and rights of permanent residence, they do not have the same
opportunities to invest in their labour market integration,
local skills and settlement.” (ibid 2015:para.5)
In 2011, conditions have been further restricted demanding
very high levels of German skills as part of the so-called
“Integration Agreement”29 (which has to be signed by thirdcountry nationals and completed within two years) and higher
income requirements. According to MIPEX (2015:para.5)
the required high-level B1 language level is “unrealistic to
expect of all applicants learning German, especially without
enough guaranteed free/low-cost courses.” With regard to
the integration agreement, requirements are the same for
people acquiring the Austrian citizenship (Integration Act §1).
For beneficiaries of subsidiary protection the transition to a
permanent residence after five years of residing in Austria is
very difficult since this group faces many challenges due to
their vulnerable legal position (UNHCR 2015).
b. Access to the Austrian citizenship
Austria has the most restrictive citizenship policies, which
have been regulated between 2005 and 2013, and therefore
one of the lowest naturalisation rates in Western Europe
(MIPEX 2015; Biffl 2017). In 2016, there have been 8.500
naturalisations which accounts for 1.1% of the third-country
population residing in Austria for at least ten years; about
one third of the persons receiving the Austrian citizenship
have already been born in Austria. Although the number of
naturalisation increased slowly from 6,100 in 2010 to 8,500 in
2016, it represented a substantial drop compared to the early
2000s due to more restrictive citizenship policies (in 2003
44,700 naturalisations) (Statistics Austria and KMI 2017).
The access to citizenship is extremely restricted: 10 years of
residence without interruption are required to obtain the
Austrian citizenship (except for well-integrated persons, which
requires 6 years); since 2018, recognised refugees must also
Photo: Caritas Austria
38
also reported on culture, economy or democracy linked to
migration and tried to diversify the media coverage about
migrants and refugees. Nevertheless, the criminalisation of
refugees and migrants and the negative treatment of them in
the Austrian media are described by some surveys as norm;
nonetheless, as a study author stated, this is far from the reality
(ibid).
This can have real impacts. According to reports of the
organisation “civic courage and anti-racism work” (ZARA)
reported racist incidence, mainly via online hate postings and
social media, in Austria peaked in 2017 (ZARA 2018). Since
2016, online hate, often induced by media reporting, addresses
mainly Muslims and refugees. “The lack of public outcry as
well as general disparagements and suspicion expressed by
people with a public platform, seem to confirm hate posters in
their conduct.” (own translation; ZARA 2018:para.3) But also
in “real life” agitation and discrimination against Muslims,
especially against practicing Muslim women wearing veils are
documented to have gotten worse (ibid). This is partly reflected
in public debates on the integration effects of mosques and
has revived discussions about the veil as a religious symbol
(e.g. ban of full body veil in 2017, debates on forbidding the
headscarf in schools) (Heinisch and Memedi 2017; Halm and
Sauer 2017).
Another explanation is the relatively low information level
on migration and integration topics of the population. A
survey in October 2017 reveals that 56% of the respondents
have not been informed at all or have not been wellinformed about migration and integration (European
Commission 2017). When compared to findings on
the assessed living-together with refugees in Austrian
communities, it might suggest that communities hosting
refugees experience greater acceptance and more positive
attitudes, especially when encounters between newcomers
and the local population have been promoted (GfK 2016).
4.4 Migrants’ engagement in/for
countries of origin
When it comes to migrants’ engagement (mostly on a
voluntary basis either individually or within an organisation)
for development, academic literature and expert interviews
suggest that stable and secure living conditions are one of
the preconditions for migrants to be able to contribute to
development. This reflects back on integration policies and
migrants’ possibilities to access most relevant societal spheres.
“You have to be in a good and stable position. You have to have
extra resources as an individual. That means you cannot be in an
insecure position yourself. When you are in an asylum procedure
you are not stable and cannot help. Of course you still have to send
4.3 General climate and attitudes
towards migrants and refugees in
Austria
Each year the “integration barometer” measures the general
climate on migration and integration in Austria. At the end
of 2016, about half of the Austrian population judged the
living together to be negative (Hajek and Siegl 2017). The
living together with Muslim persons was even more sceptically
evaluated compared to the year before with more than 60%
assessing it to be negative. With the refugee movement
towards Austria in 2015/16 the general climate drifted from
being welcoming at the beginning to growing scepticism and
a more hostile environment later on (Rutz 2018). The arrival
of refugees raised in part awareness on conflicts especially in
the Middle East; however, reactions were twofold: On the
one hand there was solidarity and civil society engagement
which is still present; and on the other, the subjective
feeling of security worsened, and scepticism and increasing
polarisation spread across some segments of society. However,
the academic literature suggests that negative feelings towards
new comers have an impact on them. König et al. (2015:49)
state that “being made to feel like a foreigner […], which many
respondents reported as an experience, can work as a strong
impediment to feeling safe and stable.”
Hajek and Siegl (2017) suggest that the long media reporting
in Austria and the education factor play a decisive role in how
migration and integration are perceived. Not only the persistent
media coverage but also the way how it is reported and talked
about, the way flight and migration are portrayed could in
part explain the more sceptical public perception. The fracture
from a relatively objective reporting towards a more and more
negative depiction of refugees and migration in the media
took place in 2015 (Sarikakis 2017). A study showed that the
percentage of “obviously negative media coverage” was, at 37%,
especially high on online media in 2015 compared to other
countries – the peak of the humanitarian crisis. While neutral
reports steadily dwindled, negative reports doubled positive
ones. The public perception increasingly shifted from the
assessment of a humanitarian crisis and urgent action needed
by the international community, towards border controls
and national actors. Biased and inaccurate reporting, or even
false, generalising, and alarmist reporting, first and foremost
in tabloid newspapers that have a large reach in Austria, all
of this led to an increasing criminalisation of refugees and
migrants and to a description of migration as a threat for
national security. In addition, the “tendency towards ‘negative’
reporting on migrants is linked to the fact that reporting does
not include the voices of migrants.” (ibid 2017:18) Broadsheet
newspapers, public media and private audio-visual networks
instead have reported in the last years “in a more balanced
and a less alarmist way than the tabloids” (ibid 2017:18); they
39
think that they still have full functioning ties in the country of
origin, but it can turn out that they are not as deeply rooted as
they thought. Migrants often function as a bridge to the home
country but they need networks to operate – they need an
ecosystem in place, where they fit in and that accommodates
them to implement initiatives,” as one key stakeholder said.
In addition, it cannot be assumed that every person has an
interest in engaging mostly on a voluntary basis in their
countries of origin. One interviewee stated in this context
that “(t)he expectations on migrants are sometimes quite high.
They should engage locally; they should do something for their
country of origin but it is legitimate if someone is not interested
and does not want to engage; especially when someone comes
from a country where he had political problems or alike. Why
should I engage in development? I am glad I am gone.”
b. Circular migration
Some stakeholders argued that for those who want to engage
in/for the countries of origin, more administrative and legal
support could be offered in terms of visa conditions, customs
and support for circular migration in order to promote
migrants’ contributions towards the countries of origin.
Also König et al. (2015:52) highlight that “respective policy
frameworks barely accommodate transnational practices, as
the destination country’s reception and settlement framework
is mainly shaped by an implicit norm of immobile life.”
However, mobility and traveling to the country of origin is
explicitly excluded for recognised refugees who would lose
their refugee criteria if they entered their country of origin.
Traveling back and forth is possible for third-country nationals
(not living permanently in Austria) with the Visa D31, which
can be issued as a multi-entry visa, but stakeholders said that
options for circular migration are still very limited. In addition,
highly skilled third-country nationals who would like to seek
employment in Austria can apply for a Job-seekers Visa if
general requirements are met and evidence regarding special
qualifications is provided. They can apply for a Residence Visa
Category D with a validity period of six months to look for a
job but they do not have access to the labour market (BMEIA
n.d.).
money but that is more a drain than a contribution. So you have
to have your residence title, a job, children in school, extra time,
etc. All in all you have ‘to be full’ to give something.”
The statement is not surprising since for migrants societal
participation depends on their residence status which is
mostly linked to employment (or the availability of large selfsustaining economic resources); other policies such as access to
social housing depend on the duration of residence in Austria
(which e.g. recently recognised refugees hardly fulfil). In
addition, access to the social security system and some social
benefits are based on employment. Also König et al. (2015:7)
mentioned that in order for migrants to “make one’s place”30 it
is crucial for them to be safe and stable. “For our respondents,
a number of factors jointly constituted their notions of safety
and stability, comprising of personal security and wellbeing,
especially revolving around means available to maintain
physical and mental integrity, as well as the possibility to rely
on residence security and possible access to welfare.” (ibid
2015:49)
In order to engage transnationally, structural conditions such
as a secure residence status and possible access to welfare
are reported to be important besides available resources.
The academic literature indicates that the living situation,
especially a long duration of stay, the access to citizenship and
higher levels of education are favouring migrants’ engagement
(either individually or organised) in integration related issues
and/or for their countries of origin (Sieveking et al. 2008).
a. Individual capacities and transnational
networks
The interviews showed that besides stable living conditions,
individual capacities and available resources, the existence of
transnational networks can influence migrants’ engagement in
their countries of origin. Activities often cover entrepreneurial
initiatives which demand specific skills and technical knowhow that is highly dependent on the social background.
Extended times of absence and related management issues
were also brought up when talking about obstacles. Migrants
said that it constitutes a challenge to properly manage an
initiative when one is often absent as there are not enough
control mechanisms: “You never know what is really going on,
because you are not there.” Therefore, reliable networks, family
members and others, or even the possibility to pay staff can
become crucial to manage tasks in times of absence.
Migrants are often characterised as bridge builders between
two (or more) countries, but if the connection to the country
of origin is looser than anticipated, this might have an effect
on the possibilities to engage in development: “Some people Photo: Harrison Qi
40
peace building and (re-democratisation in their homelands
from which they had once fled.” (Faist and Fauser 2011:17)
Nevertheless, this cannot be generalised – engagement or even
maintaining (private) contacts can become difficult in areas of
conflict (Wojczewski et al. 2015).
One project affected by an unstable security situation is
ALODO – Helping Hands, an association based in Lower
Austria, reaching out to Togo from Austria. Komlan Jean B.
Kponvi-Dzaka from Togo, who has lived in Austria since many
years, founded the association in 2004 with the main objective
to promote education and to lower poverty. Activities financed
by donations ranged from investments in infrastructure (e.g.
building or reconstructing schools, water supply), and raising
awareness to fostering intercultural dialogue (e.g. via partner
groups in Austria and Togo promoting cultural exchange). The
founder is driven by a strong passion “to help the people in
Togo and give them some hope.” However, ALODO had to
put all activities on hold due to the actual security situation
in Togo. A health initiative aiming to send health workers for
a temporary exchange to Togo to assist the medical system in
rural areas had to be stopped.
In addition, another interviewee pointed out that in some
countries corruption can hinder development activities. In this
context, he recommended to get involved in policy advice and
networking, to make it easier for people who would like to
engage. Apart from this, a stakeholder highlighted that “this
will not keep people from giving something back to their
country”. On the contrary, it was emphasised that even in
countries with high corruption (e.g. Nigeria ranking 148 out
of 180 countries according to Transparency International32)
and/or conflict and lack of rule of law (such as Afghanistan)
remittances are sent and development activities take place.
d. Structural challenges in the countries
of origin
There might also be structural limitations for migrants not only
in the country of residence, as has been shown above, but also
in the countries of origin. For example, an Austrian stakeholder
from Rwanda explained that he needs to get a visa if he wants
to travel to Africa as he is holding the Austrian citizenship.
Since the embassy of Rwanda is in Germany, it takes a lot of
effort to obtain a visa which in turn affects his engagement.
While in Africa he felt that he was treated as a foreigner in
institutions rather than a fellow national due to his Austrian
citizenship as laws applicable to him are those for foreigners. In
addition, an interviewee reported that bureaucratic procedures
in the countries of origin are sometimes very time consuming
and concepts or project ideas difficult to transfer: “Here [in
Austria] you fill out a paper and then something is fixed. You
can start. Over there it takes forever, you have to go here and
Due to citizenship policies including the requirement of
residing at least ten years in Austria without long interruptions,
third-country nationals who are absent from Austria for a
long period might not be able to reach the requirements for
citizenship, and might therefore not be able to travel back to
their country of origin for a long time. Furthermore, dual
citizenships are in general not foreseen in the Austrian legal
framework. Interviewees mentioned that dual citizenship
would – as well as visa provisions – ease travel conditions,
which would also support engagement as it makes travelling to
the country of origin much easier (provided that the country of
origin also allows for dual citizenship). However, authors argue
that it is first and foremost the role of governments to encourage
brain circulation and different transnational activities (Harvey
2012) and to provide an enabling environment for the
successful engagement of migrants in their countries of origin
(De Haas 2005).
c. Obstacles in the countries of origin
Obstacles hindering migrants’ engagement on an individual
level or through organisations in the countries of origin in
developing regions referred primarily to security situations,
the limited enforcement of the rule of law, and other structural
challenges. Furthermore, in some countries the diaspora
might not be seen as a valuable resource for the development
of the countries of origin as an interviewee mentioned. One
stakeholder argued that it cannot be assumed that all local
communities want engagement from abroad and that migrants
engaging in development activities are not always perceived
positively. “Some do not want this engagement because they
feel intimidated or envy or greedy for the resources and skills.”
However, this phenomenon cannot be generalised as other
interviewees stated; at large, the specific national context
matters when it comes to obstacles but also to opportunities
for migrants’ engagement.
Conflict, civil unrest and limited enforcement of the rule of law
can affect development prospects in the countries of origin (e.g.
conflict makes development more difficult because institutions
may be fragile or in disarray, violence may be ongoing, or there
is no legal certainty for people and they had to flee with no
resources to invest back) but they do not necessarily have to. In
fact, one interviewed stakeholder argued that war and conflict
do not hinder engagement in the development of individuals:
“Look at Afghanistan, the diaspora is very active, even though
there is war since years. There are limitations – in Kunduz
nothing can be implemented as the security situation is too
difficult, but the diaspora finds its ways to support even if there
are difficult circumstances in the country of origin.” A fact
that is also highlighted in academic literature: “Increasingly,
‘diasporas’ are acknowledged actors in financial, economic,
political and social support in post-conflict reconstruction,
41
cooperation and coordination between migrants’ organisations,
well-established NGOs in the field of development cooperation,
and the Austrian Development Agency (ADA): “Even if there
have been isolated initiatives of cooperation in the past years,
contact between these organisations is still rather an exception.
Diaspora organisations should have more possibilities to get
involved through official structures and/or be able to cooperate
with experienced partners from the development NGOscene in line with a coherent development policy.” (Globale
Verantwortung 2013: 8f.) However, since the last strategic
framework of the Austrian development cooperation (“Threeyear programme 2016-2018”) the potential of migrants and
the diaspora in Austria is mentioned: “(T)he know-how of
diaspora communities for activities in their countries of origin
relevant to the development policy should be used.” (BMEIA
2016a:29) Some stakeholders argued that the diaspora
members should finally become partners in development work,
whilst others believed that besides a need for a coordinating
mechanism more capacity building and professionalisation
was necessary (Paulus 2015).
The ADA stated that there is an increased interest from smaller
migrants’ organisations to work with them. It was suggested
that a “small-project-pool” would help to increase coordination
and cooperation. Furthermore, it was recommended that
networking and partnership opportunities should also be
increased to develop more cooperation between the ADA,
development NGOs, and diaspora and migrants’ organisations.
At the same time it was mentioned that this needs a lot of time
and resources. Nevertheless, regular networking-meetings to
increase cooperation possibilities seem to be an idea, which
could be picked up on in the future.
b. Lack of resources and
professionalism
According to stakeholders, some migrants’ organisations
perceive the development cooperation sector (including NGOs
and the ADA) as being too bureaucratic and complicated;
and some development cooperation actors see migrants’
organisations as too little professionalised for an operational
working cooperation. “Migrants’ organisations do not like to
hear it, but there is often a lack of professionalism and basis
qualification. It does not qualify you as a development actor
just because you come from a country that needs development,”
said one interviewee. Consequently, there “seems to be a huge
gap between the expectations and ideas of the […] diaspora
and those organisations working in the field of development
policy.” (VIDC 2011)
In addition, migrants’ organisations are mostly organised on
a voluntary (non-remunerated) basis and offer their time and
efforts in addition to their ordinary employment and care
there and everywhere and then at the end it is still not fixed.
And when you explain your idea, it is sometimes very difficult
for people to understand.”
Within ICMPD’s “Link Up!” project main structural
challenges for enabling businesses in the countries of origin
were identified to be “linked to information, know-how and
capital in order to fully unleash the potential of diaspora
entrepreneurs.” (ICMPD n.d.a:para.5) An example shows
that accessing the credit system in countries of origin is
difficult for migrants. Most banks ask for a bank history,
which many migrants cannot provide since they abandoned
their bank account in their country of origin. In addition, a
place of residence might be needed and/or a certificate of the
local registry which most migrants cannot fulfil. König et al.
(2015) observed that their respondents even tried to support
family and friends in countries of origin when they faced
challenging structural circumstances by developing a range
of strategies such as mobilising others within transnational
ties, collecting initial capital, recruiting labour through their
networks, setting up formal structure to stabilise projects,
using communication technology and others. However, this
is, as has been mentioned, dependent on available resources
and individual capacities.
4.4.1 Migrants’ organisations
engaging in development activities
a. Lack of recognition of migrants’
organisation and of coordination with
development actors
Although migrants’ organisations engage in/for their
countries of origin in numerous ways, operating in the fields
of development education and awareness raising, charity work
and social projects in education, and advocacy for migration
and development related topics among others, actors in
development cooperation are hardly aware about their
engagement (Fanizadeh 2014). This has to do partly with the
low institutionalisation levels of these organisations and the fact
that most of them work voluntarily and sometimes informally
as has been described above. “They provide voluntary work
above all and have few resources for marketing and lobbying.”
(own translation; ibid 2014:244) Their voluntary work is
sometimes not honoured by development actors, which leads
to frustration on the migrants’ organisation side as they feel
not properly recognised. This point was also argued in an event
on diaspora engagement in development activities (ibid 2012).
In addition, a reported obstacle impeding migrants’
contributions to development in countries of origin is the lack of
42
In this context it was also mentioned by some interviewees that
more generally speaking there is a lack of political support for
migrants to engage in development activities. In recent years it
was brought forward by some people in the public sphere that
migrants who engage in development cooperation keep ties
with their country of origin hindering integration. In addition,
political actors argued that remittances should not be sent to
the countries of origin, but should rather be invested in Austria
(Die Presse 2011). Statements like that led to uncertainties
among migrants and the feeling that their engagement in the
countries of origin is perceived as negative, undesirable and
disintegrative; and might explain to a certain extent why some
migrants are reluctant to engage in development activities
as mentioned by some interviewed stakeholders: “They feel
fully integrated in Austria and do not want to be perceived
otherwise, so they stay away from it.” Particularly, given that
migrants do in fact spend the bulk of their earnings in the
country of residence (UN Secretary General 2017; IFAD 2017)
and the positive connotation of remittances for development
on international level, these statements were met with surprise
by interviewed stakeholders.
responsibilities (for children or elderly); thus there is often a
lack of resources (time-wise and person-wise). At present there
is no guidance centre, counselling office or alike to assist
migrants’ organisations when they plan to answer a call for
proposals, have questions on budgeting and reporting, or to
provide training and capacity building on relevant topics.
Several stakeholders argued that this would be needed for
small initiatives in order to enable them to participate in bigger
projects.
c. Lack of funding and of political support
Although some migrants’ organisations receive financial
resources to pay staff – either from projects, support from
federal states (“Bundesländer”) or from fund-raising activities
– most of them work voluntarily on a philanthropic basis and
lack financial funding. However, it is not only small initiatives
that lack funding, but a more structural challenge which was
mentioned by the interviewed stakeholders: Austria´s Official
Development Assistance (ODA) was criticised for the low
spending compared to other countries and for including
several areas which do not promote development in the
countries of origin such as accommodation for asylum seekers
in Austria. Due to the strong decline of asylum seekers arriving
in Austria, the ODA dropped from 0.42 of Gross National
Income (GNI) in 2016 to 0.30% in 2017 – being far off the
internationally agreed UN target of 0.7% ODA/GNI. With
the comparatively low spending on development cooperation
altogether and the scarce financial situation of small initiatives,
some migrants’ organisations complained that there is not
enough emphasis on development, which they also see as an
obstacle to fully contribute to development themselves.
Photo: Sebastian Philipp
43
through the process of migration, the difficulties while settling
and the overall difficult and perceived unwelcoming reception
in Austria.”
Furthermore, migrants’ organisations often take up the role
of practising traditions and folkloric festivities; they play a
vital role in forming a cultural identity between the country
of residence and the country of origin, and in promoting
intercultural understanding. Migrants’ organisations
additionally assume political functions (i.e. exile-political
organisations). Mostly they aim at improving the legal, social
and economic situations as well as the political participation
of migrants and at enforcing their minority rights in Austria
(Waldrauch and Sohler 2004). However, besides migrants’
organisations and the diaspora in Austria, König et al.
(2015) conclude that also transnational networks play an
important role for migrants to find their place in society.
Regarding migrants’ engagement directed towards the countries
of origin (either as individuals or through organisations),
the intrinsic motivation and philanthropic interest of many
migrants engaging on a non-profit basis in charity work and
social projects has to be considered as a resource. Many want
to help fellow nationals and to “give something back”. In
addition, drastic incidents such as natural disasters, political
unrest, conflicts and war motivate many migrants to mobilise
within the diaspora, either within migrants’ organisations
The following section provides an overview of opportunities
for contributions of migration to development in the
countries of origin and for shared responsibility among actors.
Relevant policy fields especially on enhancing migrants’
individual development refer to integration related policies
at national, federal state, and community level as promising
practices. However, the focus will be on development policies
and related good practice examples.
5.1 Migrants and their engagement
as an opportunity
While immigration makes major contributions to development
and to sustaining development in Austria, a large portion of
public opinion believed that migrants do not contribute at all
to the cultural, economic and social development in Austria,
or they had mixed feelings about it (European Commission
2018). In addition, it has been shown above that migrants
engage in the countries of origin in numerous ways – either
as individuals or through migrants’ organisations. It has to be
noted that the diaspora is to a certain extent a predictor of
future migrant movements all over the world. “Where future
migrants go is largely determined by their trailblazing relatives
in the past.” (MEDAM 2018:22)
Migrants’ organisations and the diaspora networks fulfil
roles that are of great importance for the particular situation
of migrants, migration related issues and their integration
process (König et al. 2015; Waldrauch and Sohler 2004).
One of the most important features is the “formation of social
help and supporting networks for the specific community
of origin or especially disadvantaged migrants’ groups (like
refugees or women).” (own translation, Waldrauch and Sohler
2004:37) This is especially important for newcomers, and
when support is needed in cases of institutional barriers and
obstacles in the labour market, housing and other important
societal sectors. These findings were confirmed by König et al.
(2015:34): “Activities are strongly connected with the concrete
experiences of our respondents, the change that occurred
- chapter 5 -
OPPORTUNITIES FOR CONTRIBUTIONS
OF MIGRATION TO DEVELOPMENT
44
Photo: Shutterstock
45
they are already part of and creating new initiatives, or joining
an organisation (e.g. rebuilding homes, providing medical
care, sustaining the livelihood of affected persons) (König et
al. 2015). These motivations are often accompanied by great
enthusiasm to implement useful and sustainable activities.
They can become bridge builders, speak the local languages,
and they are familiar with the cultural codes and societal
structures. They usually have family, friends and a network
of people in their countries of origin with whom they are
regularly in touch. Consequently, while being absent they can
use these contacts to stay in touch and increase connectivity.
A lively and well-functioning wide network also allows to
make business connections and to have a certain amount
of responsibility taken over by a member of the network,
which contributes to the sustainability of an activity. Plus,
networks open up easy access to information and institutions.
Therefore, vivid transnational networks play an important
role for migrants’ engagement in countries of origin. These
networks can ease access to information and institutions,
enable business connections, help to overcome structural
challenges, or even support fulfilling duties in times of absence
as has been shown above. However, this depends also on
structural conditions created by governments in Austria and
the countries of origin. “If the gap between here and there is
too big, there will not be any opportunities. You have to have
the possibility to bring your knowledge in and find the right
field to connect it to your past experiences and life in Austria,”
as one interviewee said.
In addition, is has to be mentioned that despite the importance
of migrants’ contributions to their countries of origin their
potential is limited by structural constraints (De Haas
2010). Ronald Skeldon (2008) argues that the international
discourse on migration and development has concentrated
too much on the agency of individuals and migrants’
organisations rather than focusing on global imbalances and
institutional structures on national and global level hampering
development processes. The interviewed Austrian stakeholders
echoed this perspective: “Despite the potential that migration
harbours for development processes, one cannot neglect the
fact that migration is closely tied to global economic (under-)
development.” (Globale Verantwortung 2013:2) However,
approaches at different levels with different actors involved
should not be played off against one another, but rather
mutually complement each other.
5.2 Policies and promising practices
5.2.1 The 2030 Agenda and the
Sustainable Development Goals
(SDG s)
The Austrian government has committed to the 2030 Agenda,
“a plan of action for people, planet and prosperity”33 in 2015 in
order to deal with the greatest social, economic and ecological
challenges of our time and to achieve development for all,
in Austria and in the so-called developing countries. It was
recognised that in order to overcome crucial challenges it
needs comprehensive acting in all areas at the same time, at
all levels and of all societal actors. However, according to the
Eurobarometer survey (European Commission 2017), 43% of
the Austrian respondents have not heard about the SDGs at
all, and 38% of the have heard about them but do not really
know what they are. Although there have been large increases
in awareness (+14 points), the majority of the population is still
not informed about the SDGs.
The implementation of the 2030 Agenda has been criticised by
SDG Watch Austria (2018a), a civil society platform of more
than 140 member organisations and by the Austrian Court
of Auditors (Rechnungshof 2018) for the lack of political
commitment, the unclear division of competences, and the
lack of an overall strategy for its implementation including
missing structured and coherent mechanisms to involve
the federal states (“Bundesländer”), local communities, the
civil society, as well as relevant stakeholders. The Austrian
Court of Auditors (2018) comes to the conclusion that the
“mainstreaming approach” leads to a fragmentation of the
implementation process. In addition, a regular and public
reporting on its progress in the Austrian Parliament is missing.
However, the 2030 Agenda, which aims at all relevant policies
in Austria concerned by the SDGs can become a powerful
framework to improve the future prospects of all – in Austria
and in developing countries – and to protect the planet at the
same time.
Only recently there have been several initiatives in Austria in
order to promote the 2030 Agenda. In 2018, the first Austrian
SDG Forum was held to assess the Austrian performance
on the SDG implementation. The forum was organised by
the civil society platform SDG Watch Austria, founded in
2017 (SDG Watch Austria 2018b). The same year, Global
Responsibility trained 43 young adults to become “SDG
ambassadors” and implement workshops in schools and
youth centres (Globale Verantwortung n.d.). In addition,
15 Austrian universities joined forces in the Alliance of
Sustainable Universities Austria in order to strengthen the
embedding of sustainability topics in universities and to
46
contribute thereby to a future-oriented society. In 2019,
the alliance starts the “UniNEtZ – Universitäten und
Nachhaltige Entwicklungsziele” (Universities and Sustainable
Development Goals) project to develop an option paper to
assist the Austrian government in the implementation of the
SDGs and to promote a continuous science-society-policy
dialogue and interdisciplinary exchange (Allianz Nachhaltige
Universitäten n.d.). The Lower Austrian Government together
with the Climate Alliance, Südwind and Fairtrade Austria
started an SDG competition for local communities, education
institutions, companies, parishes and private initiatives in
2018 to promote SDG projects (Amt der NÖ Landesregierung
n.d.). In Graz the action plan for the sustainable development
of the city has been renewed on the basis on the 2030 Agenda
with reference to relevant SDGs, and the action plan has
been prolonged until 2030 (Stadt Graz Umweltamt 2017 ).
5.2.2 Development policies
While migration and especially the topic of international
protection are very dominant in the media and public
discussions, “(t)he complex link between migration and
development are however rarely communicated in this
context” (Globale Verantwortung 2013: 12) and further, it
“receives no publicity in the mainstream media. Something
may sporadically appear in development policy media and a
variety of community media.” (Ngo Tam and Joschika 2012:
18) However, according to interviewed stakeholdersthere was a
significant change in Austria among policy makers concerning
the link between development and migration after the large
refugee movements towards Austria in 2015/16.
Before, there were several smaller initiatives on migration
and development related issues mainly aiming at awareness
raising. The most important initiative in recent years was
the “CoMiDe – Initiative for Migration and Development”
project from 2011 to 2014 implemented by the Vienna
Institute for International Dialogue and Cooperation (VIDC)
and funded by the European Commission, which entered
unknown territory for involved stakeholders and institutions.
However, since 2015/16, political discussions have been
increasingly focussing on linking development cooperation to
readmission agreements and the idea of mitigating migration
through development which can be traced to the strategic
focus paper of the Austrian development policy. Austrian
NGOs working in development cooperation, represented by
Global Responsibility (the umbrella organisation of 35 civil
society organisations working on development cooperation
and humanitarian assistance), discuss policy approaches
on migration and development for more than one decade
presenting their perspectives in two position papers (in 2007
and 2013).
Global Responsibility recommended to delink development
from restrictive migration policy (development cooperation
should not be linked to readmission programmes; and the
financing of border control mechanisms through development
funds should end), and to focus on combatting poverty and
structural causes instead. In addition, legal and safe migration
pathways to the EU for low-qualified people should be
discussed (AGEZ 2007). The second paper published in 2013
recommends that partner countries of European development
cooperation and European agents should develop together
47
livelihood, the water, the sanitary and hygienic situation, and
the access to education of refugees and the local population in
countries hosting large numbers of refugees such as Jordan,
Lebanon, Uganda, Pakistan, and Ethiopia (ADA n.d.a).
Furthermore, the strategic programme states that development
aid should be linked to building up functioning constitutional
structures in the area of migration and asylum including
readmission agreements (BMEIA 2016b). The program
was updated in 2017 endorsing once more that migration
is a new focus of the Austrian development policy due to
humanitarian crises all over the world (BMEIA 2017). In
addition, the programme refers to the 2030 Agenda and the
SDGs including a matrix which offers an overview of the
region, regional objectives, actors and relevant SDGs in this
regard. However, some representatives of the civil society
suggested the linkage of development policy with migration is
driven by motivations to mitigate refugee movements towards
Austria, and conditioning ODA-reception on readmission
programmes was criticised (Obrovsky 2017).
The current Three-year programme (2019-2021) prioritises
among other things,34 equal rights and the advancement of
women as a crosscutting area. Again, the 2030 Agenda and
its SDGs work as a common framework for the programme
as mentioned above (BMEIA 2018:10). The civil society
points out that references to Austria’s contribution to global
development worldwide and the SDGs are missing, and
migration policies that focus on migrants’ human rights.
Furthermore, development issues should be included in
migration policies. It is also recommended to create institutional
mechanisms to foster policy coherence and a cross-cutting
donor structure putting migration and development into
practice (AGEZ 2007; Globale Verantwortung 2013).
The strategic orientation of the Austrian development policy
has been presented since 2005 in a three-year programme.
Since 2013, in the corresponding “Three-year programme”
(until 2015), development policy should explicitly mitigate
migration flows (BMEIA 2012). In the following Three-year
programme (2016-2018), migration becomes one of the fields of
action of the Austrian development policy. Under the slogan to
“fight root causes of forced migration and irregular migration”,
development aid should arrive also in countries that are not
“ADA focus countries”, especially in the Middle East and
Sub-Saharan Africa, mainly through substitute presentation
structures (such as the EU and UN) and in post-conflict crises
via humanitarian assistance increasing the geographical reach
of the Austrian humanitarian response. This is important
since the majority of asylum seekers and refugees are hosted by
the Global South and many by the least-developed countries
worldwide. In recent years, due to an increase of conflicts
worldwide, the Austrian development cooperation also
targeted countries hosting large numbers of asylum seekers
and refugees. At the moment there are several two- to threeyear projects funded by ADA that are aimed at improving the
Photo: Jork Weismann
48
released a Focus Paper on Migration and Development (ADA
2016) and in 2017 a “migration and development” call for
projects in the area of development education was launched
for the first and by now last time. Within the focus paper
ADA aims “to maximise the potential of linking migration
and development and to minimise related risks […] based on
the development needs of partner countries and the fulfilment
of individual human rights. It is not conditioned by the fact
that they are migrant-sending countries or on the assumption
that they might curb migration to Europe.” (ADA 2016:15)
Within the focus paper, ADA wants to address the following
actions, which are not yet fully developed: 1) International,
EU and regional dialogue (support of thematic roundtables,
coordination with EU institutions and participation in
EU meetings); 2) Policy Coherence in Austria (support the
establishment of a coordinating mechanism to ensure an
approach from the government as a whole); 3) Measures with
direct impact on migration and development (e.g. humanitarian
aid, combating organised crime and trafficking in human
beings, awareness raising measures, strengthening migrants’
engagement in the countries of origin, support in managing
migration, and reintegration on the basis of voluntary return), 4)
Measures with indirect effects on migration and development
(Conflict prevention and peace building, sustainable economic
development, improved livelihood conditions and resilience,
support of good governance approaches) and 5) Consideration
of migration aspects in programs and projects (e.g. considering
relevant principles such as human rights-based approaches and
gender responsive approaches). Some of these possible actions
and engagements are not fully developed yet.
In order to raise awareness among the staff, training sessions
were held on migration and familiar issues such as trafficking in
and smuggling of human beings. ADA representatives argued
that the linkage of migration and development is now widely
accepted and known within the institution. Nonetheless,
for the ADA it was important to also raise awareness on the
limits of development cooperation to mitigate migration as
expectations that development activities might lower forced
migration might be too high.
b. Funding for development cooperation
and humanitarian aid
Since 1970 the Austrian government repeatedly renewed
its commitment to the internationally agreed objective to
earmark 0.7% of the GNI to development cooperation and
humanitarian assistance. This objective has been renewed in
the 2030 Agenda (SDG 17.2). However, Austria´s contribution
in 2017 was 0.30% (being ranked 12 out of 29 DAC members
(OECD 2018a) and within the current Three-year programme
(until 2021) the international ODA-commitment is not
that the thematic focus areas remain noncommittal and
general (Obrovsky 2018). “However, the question of how the
overall statehood, thus the policy coherence in the interest of
sustainable development being guaranteed, is not sufficiently
presented in the three-year programme.” (own translation;
Globale Verantwortung 2018) Essential elements of a
strategy such as concrete objectives and measures including
results and indicators are missing. The course on migration35
remains basically the same as in the previous programme.
Global Responsibility criticises again the conditionality of
partner countries to readmission agreements: “Because such
conditionality does not correspond to legally determined tasks
of development cooperation. Its objective is to fight poverty
and to enable a good life for all according to the 2030 Agenda.”
(own translation; Globale Verantwortung 2018b)
While migration and development have been discussed
together for more than one decade among stakeholders in
Austria, offering room for the necessary discussions and
possible on-site assistance in this regard, policy makers
focused increasingly on the idea of managing and mitigating
migration through development cooperation in the last years.
However, development cooperation has the task of supporting
economic, social and material development elsewhere and to
provide the basis to eradicate poverty and to shape integral
human development in order to not push people into forced
migration due to existential threats. There are untapped
potentials to strengthen the Austrian development cooperation
in order to address the root causes of forced migration, and
to address the large group of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in the Global South. Furthermore, stakeholders said
that expectations are high on development initiatives having
an impact on immigration and/or emigration from certain
countries. Although development cooperation can influence
structural conditions to a certain extent, development policy
has no impact on armed conflicts which are among the
main drivers for large refugee movements. In addition, there
are no clear and simple causalities between migration and
development, and there is limited evidence that development
cooperation would lead to lower migration.
a. The ADA as an actor in the field of
migration and development
For years, migration and development were not a main focus
of the Austrian Development Agency (ADA), even though
the agency was active in South-Eastern Europe striving to
find ways to encourage migrants to send remittances to
their countries of origin to support enterprises. In addition,
an annual competition for students from Western Balkan
countries was organised in the past to combat brain drain.
With the focus on migration and development after 2015/16
new areas of work opened up for the ADA. In 2016, ADA
49
5.2.3 Promising practices
In Austria, promising practices in the context of migration
and development initiated by or in cooperation with
migrants’ organisations can be found above all in the fields
of development education and awareness raising, and the
promotion of migrants’ entrepreneurship in the countries
of origin. The examples show that the cooperation between
migrants’ organisations, state institutions and other
institutionalised stakeholders took place mainly within the last
decade. Apart from state institutions, important stakeholders
in the field are Global Responsibility, the Südwind
Association for Development Policy and Global Justice, the
Institute for International Development at the University of
Vienna (VIDC), International Centre for Migration Policy
Development (ICMPD), and the International Organisation
for Migration (IOM). While some have started already
cooperation with migrants’ organisations, others hold
presentations, give conferences or host specific events on the
topic (but only occasionally). However, stakeholders argued
that it would be important to offer perspectives for individuals
and migrants’ organisation on how to engage in development
activities if they have an interest to do so.
mentioned. Concrete steps have not been set (e.g. like the
suggested step-by-step plan). Therefore, it is unclear how and
until when this goal will be reached (Obrovsky 2018; Globale
Verantwortung 2018b). To reach the goal as promoted, the
government would need to spend an additional €200 million
per year until 2030 (Concord 2018). Furthermore, almost a
quarter (€247 million) of the ODA is not “on-site assistance”
arriving in countries in the Global South – a fact that is
commonly criticised (Globale Verantwortung 2018a).
There is a need to address the structural causes of forced
migration such as poverty, hunger, and inequality; and to
support the host countries of asylum seekers and refugees.
Austrian development cooperation can certainly contribute
in line with the 2030 Agenda and the many SDGs, to
tackle displacement, forced migration and migration-related
situations. Furthermore, in order to strengthen the impact
of development cooperation in developing countries, policy
coherence should be guaranteed. It is important to support
countries in the Global South hosting large numbers
of asylum seekers and refugees. An effective tool is the
provision of sufficient funds for development cooperation
and humanitarian assistance, including in protracted refugee
situations, in order to build perspectives, find long-term
solutions and support the local communities .
Photo: Jork Weismann
50
Radio Afrika TV is an association since 1997 that has the
aim to improve the African-European relationship and to
work on a more differentiated and positive picture of the
African continent in Austria. Founded as a radio station, its
interest was to connect the African diaspora living in Austria
and to provide fair information about Africa. Since then,
there have been many media activities such as the launch of a
newspaper (the “Afrika Magazin”) and TV programs, and the
implementation of integration projects such as INTEGRO.
Radio Afrika TV reaches about 200,000 people in Austria.
The association’s chairman, Alexis Neuberg, also funded
AfriPoint, a centre for communication, intercultural exchange
and encounter. Among other things, they offer an “expertpool” for project implementation.
b. Promoting entrepreneurship in the
countries of origin
The Association of African Students in Austria (VAS) is
first and foremost a network of support for African students
in Austria, to assist with the integration processes and to
encourage entrepreneurship in the countries of origin by
providing networking and organising events, such as the so
called African Diaspora Youth Forum in Europe (ADYFE).
An ADYFE representative is also the chairman of the students’
association. VAS Austria is also a good practical example for
successful cooperation with other stakeholders in both areas.
They organised several events to encourage labour market
integration such as a forum on job placement together with the
Austrian Development Agency (ADA) and the United Nations
Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO), as well
as several workshops with the Austrian Economic Chamber
(WKO) to transfer knowledge and to support students in their
efforts to both integrate in Austria and if possible to support
their country of origin. In 2014, they started to organise the
youth-led ADYFE forum; since its beginning there have
already been six forums. ADYFE supports entrepreneurs
accessing quality jobs, tries to enhance entrepreneurship,
and promotes joint activities between African, Diaspora and
European companies. ADYFE enjoys a strong cooperation
with UNIDO working together on several events.
The project “Link Up! Serbia – Facilitating Diaspora
Investments” funded by the ADA, started in 2015 (until
2017) with the goal to assess the business environment
for diaspora investments in Serbia by identifying market
failures, underutilised investment situations, and exploring
mechanisms that could be instituted to leverage diaspora
direct investments” (ICMPD n.d.b). The outcome of the
study serves as a basis for the development of a follow-up
project. Serbia is the country with the third-highest amount
of remittances from Austria ($338 million in 2016). These
resources hold potential for the development of the private
a. Development education and awareness
raising on migration and development
Even though the media coverage on migration and international
protection is relatively high in Austria, there is still a lack of
contextual knowledge on migration and the links between
migration and development among the population as the
Eurobarometer (European Commission 2018) has revealed.
However, there are good practice projects raising awareness
on migration and development in Austria, and promoting
intercultural understanding as well as a comprehension of
global connections.
In Austria, the initiative “CoMiDe – Initiative for Migration
and Development” was the first widely recognised initiative
raising awareness on migration and development and bringing
migrants’ organisations and NGOs together. It was a three-year
project (2011-2014) of several organisations in Italy, Slovenia,
Slovakia, and Austria led by VIDC (VIDC n.d.). It aimed at
a coherent migration and development policy on a national
and European level. The project not only raised awareness
on the topic but also supported networking and cooperation
between development NGOs and migrants’ organisations. A
manifesto on diaspora engagement and migrants’ as agents of
development cooperation was elaborated.
The project “Ke NaKo Afrika – Afrika jetzt! An initiative
for a Multi-faceted Picture of Africa” (ADA n.d.b) was
a joint initiative of the ADA, the VIDC and the African
Networking Platform, and approximately 100 partner
organisations in 2010. It was advocating for a positive picture
of Africa and actively included and represented members of
the African communities in over 300 events. One was for
example an exhibition on Africa in Vienna including a market
place for African art. The project attracted 180.000 people and
was awarded the State Prize for Public Relations.
Chiala – Association for the promotion of culture, diversity
and development was founded in 2012 in Graz. It is a space
of encounter and exchange for people with and without
migration background. As well as other initiatives, Chiala
committed itself to change the perception of the African
continent in Austria and to promote positive narratives. The
association provides spaces for encounters and exchanges
among people with and without migration background. Every
year they organise the Chiala Africa Festival in Graz. Among
other things, they offer social counselling for migrants; creative
and anti-racism workshops for schools; and art and culture
work. The first African media library in Graz was found by
Chiala. In addition, the association took the first steps in
2017 to implement development activities in the Republic of
Cameroon.
51
Ministry of Economy and Regional Development. It aims at
involving different institutions to support the development
and realisation of business ideas from the diaspora, as well
as at developing the cooperation between the diaspora and
Serbia in the preparation phase and work towards sustainable
deliverables.
Some stakeholders argued that there is a need to raise awareness
on migration and development and to improve knowledge on
contexts and structural reasons for differences in Austria in
order to improve mutual understanding, to generate a more
realistic and constructive picture of migrants and refugees
living in Austria, and to improve the social climate. “If there
is political and social stability, migration is a possibility not a
necessity. This should be the aim, and people in Austria should
be conscious of that. People should be able to migrate, if they
want to – but they should not have to migrate forcefully,” was
the comment by one stakeholder. In addition, it would be
important to highlight the multiple positive contributions of
migrants living in Austria.
sector in Serbia, which is actively promoted by the project. It is
implemented by the International Centre for Migration Policy
Development (ICMPD), a policy research centre funded
by the Austrian Development Agency (ADA) and involves
migrants’ participation.
In this context the regional conference in 2017 “Direct
investment from the Diaspora – Experiences from the West
Balkans” in Vienna was an important event for the Serbian
community as it emphasised once more the economical
contribution of the diaspora to the development of Serbia
(Dijaspora online 2017a). In the country of origin these
projects and initiatives are very much welcomed. The Serbian
government plans to establish an investment centre for the
diaspora abroad in 2018 (ibid 2017b). The centre will serve
as a point of information, offer services such as counselling
and function as a bridge between the diaspora and the Serbian
economy, state institutions and local municipalities. The centre
is part of the Serbian chamber of commerce and represents
an outcome of the strategic partnership with the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Serbian
Photo: Blake Barrow

53
- chapter 6 -
Conclusions and recommendations
Besides economic contributions (economic remittances,
foreign direct investments, social-economic investments)
migrants contribute within their individual capacities (either
individually or through organisations, and mostly on a
voluntary and non-profit basis) to societies and communities
in their countries of origin. The organisations and projects
exemplified throughout the report range from charity work
and social projects in the field of education and promoting
income-generating activities, to transnational exchange of
expert knowledge, advocacy work, human rights’ observation,
and the fostering of diaspora entrepreneurship. The report
found that the intrinsic motivation and philanthropic interest
of many migrants engaging on a non-profit basis has to be
considered as a resource. Many people want to help fellow
nationals and “give something back”. This resource could be
further strengthened; stable and secure living conditions in
Austria are preconditions. In addition, vivid transnational
networks are crucial for migrants to engage in their countries
of origin. Furthermore, policy frameworks could encourage
transnational activities in the countries of origin.
The possibility to stabilize and secure living conditions in Austria
reflect back on integration policies and migrants’ access to most
relevant societal spheres (such as the labour market among
others), and to a secure residence status. As a cross-cutting issue,
integration embraces all social spheres addressing newcomers
and the local population as do institutions aiming at a peaceful
and respectful living together. In order to enable migrants and
refugees to participate in Austrian society, it is recommended
that their integration process should be de facto facilitated
at an early stage – this should also include people seeking
international protection and addressing also those entitled
to subsidiary protection. Integration at an early stage would
enable them to take root in Austria, to unfold their potentials
and, if they want, to contribute to their countries of origin.
Particular concerns were identified with inadequate and
inappropriate measures for inclusion and integration of
refugees and persons granted subsidiary protection. The link of
the “Integration Declaration” of the Austrian Integration Act
(that refugees and people granted subsidiary protection have
to sign immediately after the recognition of their protection
Both emigration and immigration have long been major
features of the history of Austria, and migrants have been
contributing to economic development and growth, as well
as to many aspects of integral human development. Migrants
today constitute a significant portion of the work force, over
15%. In addition to the several hundred thousand resident
migrants living and working in Austria, the country has a
large contingent of temporary foreign workers. Especially
the number of posted workers sent to Austria has increased
steadily over the past years. The vast majority – 89% of the
foreign labour force – is from wider Europe; 7% is from Asia;
and about 1% each respectively comes from Africa, Central/
South America, and North America.
As the OECD put it, migrants are the major driver of total
employment growth in Austria. In addition, they contribute
more to the Austrian social security system than they receive
in social cash benefits (primarily through social security
contributions, wage and value added taxes). Foreigners make
up a large proportion of people working in arts and culture,
professional sports, science and research. Migrants contribute
to community life as neighbours, club members and volunteers,
represented in every sector within formalised voluntary work,
and extensively in informal voluntary activity.
Austrian emigrants and others abroad send nearly $3 billion per
year to Austria, while migrants in Austria remit some $4 billion
abroad. The former represents a substantial contribution to the
Austrian economy, while the latter can be seen as contribution
to development and welfare in the countries of origin, many of
which are important economic partners for Austria. However,
the treatment faced by numbers of migrant workers in low
paid and low skilled occupations, including those of European
origin, constitutes an impediment to their welfare as well as
to the contributions they can make to the development and
well-being of Austria as well as to their countries of origin.
National legislation protecting the human and labour rights
of migrants is incomplete. While Austria has extensive labour
law regulations, it appears these are insufficiently enforced for
migrant workers in certain low wage and higher risk sectors
where migrants are concentrated.
54
in a targeted and coordinated way. Government at all levels
can contribute to this, as can Austrian unions, business/private
sectors associations, civil society and faith-based organisations.
The report has shown that immigration makes major
contributions to development and to sustaining development
in Austria. However, a large portion of public opinion believed
that migrants do not contribute at all to the cultural, economic
and social development in Austria, or else they had mixed
feelings about migrants. The attitudes towards migrants
and refugees in Austria are increasingly sceptical. In order
to counter increasingly sceptical public attitudes towards
migrants and refugees in Austria, existing initiatives in Austria
contributing to a more realistic perception of migrants and
refugees, in recognising their contributions in both integration
and developmental aspects, and in promoting mutual
understanding should be further strengthened.
Media corporations and increasingly social media companies
have a very important role in this regard and should assume
responsibility as the “fourth power in the state” – and in
society – for the way public opinion is formed, and thus
provide factual coverage in order to generate a fact-based
and constructive picture of migrants and refugees living
in Austria. Currently, stories on refugees and migrants in
mainstream media sometimes lack objectivity. Providing
background information and facts are key to promote a
fact-based and responsible public discourse on migrants and
refugees. Concrete measures in this regard are included in the
recommendations below.
An especially serious challenge to an inclusive Austria
benefiting from the contributions of migrants and refugees
is the observed rise of racist and xenophobic hostile discourse
about migrants and refugees. This requires action by ensuring
the realisation of anti-discrimination and equality of treatment
discourse, policy and practice throughout Austria, as well as
organising campaigns to stop and prevent expressions of
racism and xenophobia.
Within the Austrian development policy migration was
not explicitly discussed up until 2013, the humanitarian
crises in the Middle East and the large refugee movements
towards the country in 2015/16 constituted a major change
in this regard. While among stakeholders the links between
migration and development have been discussed for more than
one decade, offering room for the necessary discussions and
possible on-site assistance, policy makers focused increasingly
on the idea of managing and mitigating migration through
development cooperation in the last years. However,
development cooperation has the task to support economic,
social and material development elsewhere and to thus provide
the basis to eradicate poverty and to shape integral human
development. There are untapped potentials to strengthen the
status) with the “social help”, the last social safety net support
in Austria, may deny refugees essential support in situations of
hardship, a support that could prevent them from drifting into
poverty and social exclusion. The new Social Assistance Act
which is under way at the time of preparing this report shall
grant less favourable treatment especially for people entitled to
international protection; access to the normal social assistance
is linked to integration-policy objectives and shall be cut
drastically if people do not fulfil the very high requirements;
there are concerns that the remaining assistance would not
prevent peoples from drifting into poverty. Despite the fact
that this counteracts the original objectives of preventing
and eradicating poverty, it does not take into account the
practicalities of learning a new language and the heterogeneity
of the more vulnerable group of people seeking international
protection. Also, restrictions on asylum seekers’ access to the
labour market, contrary to expectations under EU law and
recent abolition of apprenticeships for people seeking asylum,
cannot be endorsed.
Policy coherence, credibility and effectiveness means that
planned integration related policies are target-oriented, tailormade and not contradictory to other policies, and that they
are constructed and implemented with the full involvement
and participation of the migrant and refugee populations
in consultation with representative organisations and social
partners and civil society.
Migrants’ organisations do not only direct their activities
towards their countries of origin but they also engage
in Austria; many are active in the field of integration, in
promoting intercultural understanding and exchange. More
generally speaking they fulfil roles that are of great importance
for the particular situation of migrants, migration related
issues and their integration process. The report showed that
migrants’ organisations engaging in developmental activities
are sometimes confronted with a lack of recognition by some
development actors. In addition, the report found that there
is a lack of political support, a need for more coordination
with stakeholders in this field, scarce resources, and issues
referring to professionalism. With the comparatively low
spending on development cooperation altogether and the
scarce financial situation of small initiatives, some migrants’
organisations complained that there is not enough emphasis
on development, which they also see as an obstacle to fully
contribute to development themselves. In Austria, promising
practices in the context of migration and development
initiated by or in cooperation with migrants’ organisations
can be found above all in the fields of development education
and awareness raising and the promotion of migrants’
entrepreneurship in the countries of origin. Migrants and
refugees - as relative newcomers and often with few material
resources - need support to empower themselves as agents for
development. They need orientation to be able to contribute
55
Austrian development cooperation – which is at the moment
far off the internationally agreed objective of 0.7% ODA/
GNI – to address structural causes of forced migration such
as poverty, hunger, and inequality; to support host countries
of refugees; and to address the large group of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) in the Global South. In recent
years, due to an increase of conflicts worldwide, the Austrian
development cooperation also aimed to help countries
hosting large numbers of asylum seekers and refugees.
In view of the fact that the majority of asylum seekers and
refugees are hosted by the Global South and many by the
least-developed countries worldwide, it is important to support
these countries since the pressure on them is enormous. The
provision of sufficient funds for humanitarian assistance and
development cooperation, including in protracted refugee
situations, in order to cover the basic needs of asylum seekers
and refugees and to support local communities, is an effective
tool in this regard. However, this should not happen at the
expense of others. Austrian development cooperation can
certainly contribute – if it is substantial and appropriately
allocated – to the realisation of the 2030 Agenda and the
many Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) relevant to
displacement and forced migration and migration-related
situations.
In addition, there is a need to sensitise the population on
structural causes of forced migration, the lack of legal and
regular pathways for asylum seekers and people being pushed
to migrate due to existential threats, as well as the potentials of
development policy to tackle poverty, hunger and inequality.
Finally, the research conducted for this report demonstrated
how essential good data and knowledge are to good policy and
practice. On some of the concerns discussed above, adequate,
accurate and reliable data was difficult to find, often because
the data has not been collected. More broadly, in the case of
the overall focus of the report – migration and development
in Austria – there were limited research studies, making
this report a pioneering accomplishment. The section below
highlights the main recommendations stemming from the
findings.
56
D Strengthen the role of the Austrian development
cooperation to address forced migration and structural
causes including poverty, hunger, and inequality, as well
as to support integral human development elsewhere.
a. Promote the implementation and inclusion of goal 10 of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): “Reduce inequality
within and among countries” and compliance with the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change in Austrian domestic and
international policy, as well as implementation of all other
SDGs related to enhancing peoples’ livelihood security (SDG
1, 2, 6, 11, 13), access to basic services and income (SDG 3, 4,
8), gender equality (SDG 5), and peace (SDG 16).
b. Respect international commitments by allocating 0.7%
of Gross National Income to Official development assistance
(ODA) without counting reception costs of asylum seekers as
ODA.
c. Ensure that all ODA follows the goal of supporting
sustainable development as enumerated in the UN 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
d. Ensure that budgets for migration and development are
linked only if both aim at the sustainable development agenda
and humanitarian assistance, avoiding any conditionality
of Austrian or European ODA linked to management of
migratory flows and/or to the funding of border or migratory/
mobility control actions.
e. Increase allocations of development and humanitarian
assistance to the countries in the Global South hosting large
numbers of refugees and asylum seekers.
f. Establish a dialogue with migrants’ organisations in
international development assistance and promote networking,
exchange and cooperation between migrants’ organisations,
the Austrian Development Agency (ADA), NGOs in
development cooperation, and other relevant stakeholders (i.e.
universities).
E Increase the dialogue and engagement with migrants’
organisations and civil society in Austria
a. Create an enabling environment for the participation of
diaspora and migrant organisations in the process of designing,
implementing, monitoring and evaluating public policies at
national, city and local community levels affecting migration,
integration and development.
b. Strengthen ongoing dialogue with social partners, civil
society and relevant stakeholders and engage with migrants
and the diaspora to include their input in designing coherent,
planned, target-oriented, tailor-made integration policies that
are effective and do not contradict other policies.
c. Foster the participation of diaspora and migrant
Recommendations:
B Raise awareness about migration and development
within the general public and ensure coherence and
cooperation across government structures
a. Recognise and promote migrants and their contributions
as both fellow human beings and as agents of development,
by acknowledging the importance of their economic
contributions where they reside and in their countries of origin
(through remittances) as well as their ‘social contributions’
– including flows of skills, knowledge, ideas and values that
can be transmitted from and to their countries of origin – as
Austrian migrants do elsewhere.
b. Promote policy coherence and coordination between different
government actors and other stakeholders on law, policy and
practice on migration and development, in particular across
the ‘whole of government’ including all concerned government
ministries and agencies covering such functions as Foreign
Affairs, Development Cooperation, Interior, Employment,
Industry, Agriculture, Health, Education, Social Protection,
migration/immigration, and others.
C Establish a fact-based and responsible public discourse
on migrants and refugees in all news and communications
media, and on social media in particular
a. Articulate and promote a vision of migrants as contributors
to all spheres of Austrian society, and as a bridge between
different cultures and people.
b. Support media in creating awareness of the rights and
contributions of migrants, and in disseminating accurate
narratives which include the challenges, as well as positive
images and stories on migration, migrants and refugees.
c. Promote the values and standards contained in the code
of honour of the Austrian press to ensure fair and balanced
reporting.
d. Organise press events on migration (specifically to counter
myths about asylum and flight) and to show the links of
migration with development, to raise awareness among
journalists.
e. Promote fact checking through independent platforms and
the distribution of this information on social media.
f. Establish partnerships with actors in the media and launch
campaigns on social media to counter anti-migration and
extreme right-wing campaigns with accurate discourse and
narratives.
57
G Ensure particular attention to protection for and
integration of refugees and asylum seekers in Austria
a. Support and assist recognised refugees and people granted
subsidiary protection to fulfil the “Integration Declaration”
under the Austrian Integration Act. Ensure that basic social
assistance (“Sozialhilfe”), is provided regardless of fulfilment
of integration requirements to prevent refugees from drifting
into poverty and social exclusion. In addition, people granted
subsidiary protection should not be excluded from a large part
of social assistance.
b. Strengthen legal securities for all refugees’ residence status
to ensure integration and uphold psychological health of
refugees, in particular by abolishing the “temporary asylum”
status regulation.
c. Provide specific, targeted support for labour market
inclusion of recognised refugees and people granted subsidiary
protection, including the allocation of meaningful funds
under the Integration Year Act, ensuring effective access to
the labour market for asylum seekers as foreseen by EU law,
and reinstating access to apprenticeship for persons seeking
asylum.
H Prevent discrimination and xenophobia
a. Strengthen anti-discrimination, anti-racism and equality
legislation, public policy, business practices and union action
to eradicate these behaviours from all spheres: particularly
in employment, in the education system, in accessing other
resources and rights.
b. Enforce existing anti-discrimination legislation and
adopt new law as necessary to prevent discrimination and
violence against migrants, and to provide redress for victims,
in conformity with the International Convention for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination – ICERD and its Treaty
Body recommendations.
c. Work together with political parties, associations and
community groups to launch and sustain awareness-creating
campaigns in the media, as well as on social media to promote
non-discrimination and equality of treatment, respect for
cultural diversity, and foster migrants’ participation.
d. Urge political, social, educational, business, sports, religious
and community leaders, and public figures to speak up with
strong messages of solidarity and respect, promoting equality
of treatment and opportunities, and to condemn all racist,
xenophobic, or other discriminatory behaviour or actions,
including hate speech and violence.
organisations in discussion about migration and development
by, for example, encouraging their participation through
expert meetings, structured dialogues and workshops.
d. Make funding and other support available to further build
the capacity of refugee, diaspora and migrant organisations,
including training, informational meetings, guidance on calls
for proposals and capacity building measures on development
cooperation quality standards.
e. Establish a “pool centre” collecting and making available
good practice examples and experiences of migrants’ involvement
in associations, projects and initiatives to encourage knowhow transfer and cooperation with and among migrants’
organisations.
F Facilitate migrants’ integration in Austria at an
early stage in order to enable them to participate
in Austrian society and to unfold their potentials
a. Advocate for proactive communication and policy from
the public administration by encouraging the integration
of migrants and refugees in all spheres of Austrian society,
particularly in employment, education, housing, health,
sports, and cultural activities, among others.

b. Promote the importance, availability and accessibility
of immediate language classes and integration courses for
arriving migrants and refugees.

c. Foster and simplify family reunification mechanisms as a
form of legal migration.
d. Expand legal, institutional and sectoral measures at all
levels for recognising foreign educational attainment, skills
qualifications, and work experience.
e. Take specific measures to facilitate early access by migrants
and refugees to employment in decent work, to apprenticeships,
to technical skills adaptation to Austrian standards, among
others.
f. Strengthen roles and actions of local governments in
promoting and facilitating migrants’ inclusion and integration,
and a respectful and peaceful living together in the local
community, and ensure local governments address all resident
and arriving migrants regardless of status.

g. Include migrants’ organisation, churches, associations and
labour unions in local integration policies to provide migrants
with swift starts, and to contribute to mutual understanding
between migrants and Austrian citizens.

59
List of publications
Akesson, Lisa. 2001. “Making Migrants Responsible for
Development: Cap Verdean Returnees and Northern
Migration Policies.” Africa-Spectrum 41(1): 61–83.
Asylkoordination. 2011. Geschützte Einreise von Flüchtlingen in
Österreich. Retrieved December 12, 2018 from: http://archiv.
asyl.at/projekte/et_legal_entry_austria.pdf
Bacchi, Alessia. 2016. “Highly Skilled Egyptian Migrants
in Austria. A case of brain drain or brain gain?” Journal of
immigrant & refugee studies 14(2): 198-219.
Bauböck, Rainer. 1996. Nach Rasse und Sprache verschieden.
Migrationspolitik in Österreich von der Monarchie bis heute. Political
Science Series No. 31. Vienna: Institut für Höhere Studien.
Bauer, Werner. 2008. Zuwanderung nach Österreich. Vienna:
Österreichische Gesellschaft für Politikberatung und
Politikentwicklung.
Beck, Ulrick. 1986. Risikogesellschaft. Auf dem Weg in eine andere
Moderne. Frankfurt on the Main: Suhrkamp.
Berger, Johannes, Gudrun Biffl, Nikolaus Graf, Ulrich
Schuh and Ludwig Strohner.. 2016. Ökonomische Analyse der
Zuwanderung von Flüchtlingen nach Österreich. Schriftenreihe Migration
und Globalisierung. Krems: Donau-Universität Krems. Retrieved
July 6, 2018 from: https://www.donau-uni.ac.at/imperia/md/
content/department/migrationglobalisierung/forschung/
schriftenreihe/berger_2016_oekonomische_analyse_flucht.
pdf
Biffl, Gudrun. 2017. Migration and Labour Integration in
Austria. SOPEMI Report on Labour Migration Austria 2016-
17. Krems: Danube University Krems / Department for
Migration and Globalisation.
Biffl, Gudrun. 2011. Deckung des Arbeitskräftebedarfs durch
Migration in Österreich. Studie des Nationalen Kontaktpunkts
Österreich im Europäischen Migrationsnetzwerk. Vienna:
Internationale Organisation für Migration/European
Migration Network.
Biffl, Gudrun and Brigitte Schütz. 2004. Der Einfluss von
Immigration auf die österreichische Gesellschaft. Vienna: IOM, EMN.
Bittmann, Theresa. 2013. Highly qualified and qualified immigration
of third-country nationals. Legislation, measures and statistics in Austria.
Vienna: International Organisation for Migration/European
Migration Network.
Blaschitz, Verena, Katharina Korecky-Kröll, and Wolfgang
Dressler. 2019. „MigrantInnen wollen nicht Deutsch lernen.“
Pp. 245-260 in Migration und Integration: Fakten oder Mythen?
edited by Max Haller. Vienna: Österreichische Akademie der
Wissenschaften.
Borkert, Maren. 2012. “Migration und Entwicklung”. Notes
presented at the ADA network meeting, December 15,
Vienna.
Brinkerhoff, Jennifer. 2012 [2009]. “Creating an enabling
environment for diasporas’ participation in homeland
development”. International Migration 50:75-95.
Bundesministerium für Arbeit, Soziales und
Konsumentenschutz (BMASK). 2016. AusländerInnen und
der Sozialstaat Österreich: Was tragen AusländerInnen bei und was
bekommen Sie? Vienna: Bundesministerium für Arbeit, Soziales
und Konsumentenschutz.
Bundesministerium für Arbeit, Soziales und
Konsumentenschutz (BMASK). 2015. Freiwilligenbericht
2015. Zweiter Bericht zur Lage und den Perspektiven des freiwilligen
Engagements in Österreich. Vienna: Bundesministerium für
Arbeit, Soziales und Konsumentenschutz.
CAFOD et al. 2018. Engaging in the 2030 Agenda through the lens
of Laudato Si’. Retrieved March 4, 2018 from: https://cafod.
org.uk/content/download/44619/518936/version/3/file/CFSDGs_Laudato_Si_report_v10.pdf
Caritas Europa. 2010. A reflection on the dynamics between Migration
and Development. Reflection paper. Retrieved May 19, 2018 from:
- chapter 7 -
BIBLIOGRAPHY
60
https://www.caritas.eu/a-reflection-on-the-dynamicsbetween-migration-and-development
Carlin, James. 1989. The Refugee Connection: A Lifetime of Running
a Lifeline. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Concord. 2018. Aidwatch Report. 2018. EU Aid: A broken ladder?
Retrieved January 15, 2019 from: https://concordeurope.org/
wp-content/uploads/2018/10/CONCORD_AidWatch_
Report_2018_web.pdf?851490&851490
De Haas, Hein. 2010. “Remittances, Migration and
Development: Policy Options and Policy Illusions.” Pp.
158-189 in South-South Migration: Implications for Social Policy and
Development edited by Katja Hujo and Nicola Piper. London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
De Haas, Hein. 2005. “International migration, remittances
and development: Myths and facts.” Third World Quarterly
26(8):1269-1284.
Ernst & Young. 2018. Frachkräftemangel im österreichischen
Mittelstand. EY-Studie. Retrieved May 6, 2018 from:
https://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/EY-Studie_
Fachkräftemangel_im_österreichischen_Mittelstand_-_
Februar_2018/$FILE/EY-Studie%20Fachkräftemangel%20
im%20Mittelstand%202018.pdf
Ertl, Kristina. 2011. “Die Diskriminierung von
Migranten und Migrantinnen auf dem österreichischen
Arbeitsmarkt.” Diploma thesis at the University of Vienna.
Retrieved August 15, 2018 from: http://othes.univie.ac.
at/16291/1/2011-09-30_0302027.pdf
European Migration Network (EMN) and International
Organisation for Migration (IOM). 2018. EMN Annual
report 2017 on migration and asylum in Austria. Contribution
to Commission and to EASO Annual Reports. Retrieved
August 20,2018 from: https://www.emn.at/wp-content/
uploads/2018/05/annual-report-2017-on-migration-andasylum_part-1_en.pdf
European Commission. 2018. Integration of immigrants in the
European Union. Special Eurobarometer 469. Retrieved December
12, 2018 from: http://ec.europa.eu/commfrontoffice/
publicopinion/index.cfm/survey/getsurveydetail/
instruments/special/surveyky/2169
European Commission. 2017. EU citizens‘ views on
development, cooperation and aid. Special Eurobarometer
455. Retrieved December 12, 2018 from: http://ec.europa.
eu/commfrontoff ice/publ icopinion/index.cfm/
Survey/getSurveyDetail/yearFrom/1974/yearTo/2018/
surveyKy/2109
Evans, Peter. 1996. Government action, social capital and
development: reviewing the evidence on synergy. World
Development 24(6):1119-1132.
Faist, Thomas and Margit Fauser. 2011. “The MigrationDevelopment Nexus. Toward a Transnational Perspective.”
Pp. 1-26 in The Migration-Development Nexus. A transnational
perspective edited by Thomas Faist, Margit Fauser and Peter
Kivisto. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Fanizadeh, Michael. 2014. „Diaspora-Engagement und EZA
in Österreich.“ Pp. SEITEN in Migration und Entwicklung. Neue
Perspektiven edited by Ilker Atac, Michael Fanizadeh, Albert
Kraler and Wolfram Manzenreiter. Vienna: Promedia.
Fassmann, Heinz. 1990. „Einwanderung, Auswanderung und
Binnenwanderung in Österreich-Ungarn. Eine Analyse der
Volkszählung 1910.“ Österreichische Osthefte 33:51-66.
Gächter, August, Caroline Manahl and Saskia Koppenberg.
2015. Identifizierung von Arbeitskräftemangel und Bedarf an
Arbeitsmigration aus Drittstaaten in Österreich. Vienna: IOM,
EMN. Retrieved May 6, 2018 from: www.emn.at/de/
publikationen/studien
Gächter, August. 2008. Migrationspolitik in Österreich seit 1945.
Arbeitspapiere Migration und soziale Mobilität Nr. 12. Vienna:
Zentrum für Soziale Innovation. Retrieved December 12,
2018 from: https://www.zsi.at/attach/p1208vukovic.pdf
Glick Schiller, Nina. 2011. “A global perspective on migration
and development.” in The migration-development nexus. A
transnational perspective edited by Thomas Faist, Margit Fauser
and Peter Kivisto. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Growth from Knowledge (GfK). 2016. “Flüchtlinge-Chance
für Gemeinden.” Presentation of the study results at the
press conference of the Austrian Refugees’ Coordinator and
Gemeindebund Austria on June 17, Vienna, Austria. Retrieved
December 12, 2018 from: https://gemeindebund.at/
website2016/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/Praesentation_
Fluechtlingsstudie_Tischunterlage.pdf
Hajek, Peter and Alexandra Siegl. 2017. Integrationsbarometer
2017. Integrationsbefragung. Retrieved December 12, 2018 from:
https://www.integrationsfonds.at/fileadmin/content/AT/
Fotos/Publikationen/OEIF_Integrationsbarometer_2017_
WEB_neu.pdf
Halm, Dirk and Martina Sauer. 2017. Muslime in Europa.
Integriert, aber nicht akzeptiert? Gütersloh, Bertelsmann
Stiftung. Retrieved May 6, 2018 from: https://www.
bertelsmann-stiftung.de/fileadmin/files/BSt/Publikationen/
GrauePublikationen/Studie_LW_Religionsmonitor-2017_
Muslime-in-Europa.pdf
61
Harvey, William. 2012. “Brain circulation to the UK?” in
Journal of Management Development 31(2): 173–186.
Heilemann, Saskia and Rainer Lukits. 2017. The effectiveness
of return in Austria: Challenges and good practices linked to EU
rules and standards. Vienna: European Migration Network/
International Organisation for Migration. Retrieved from:
https://www.emn.at/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/EMNNational-Report-2017_Effectiveness-of-Return-in-Austria.
pdf
Heinisch, Heiko and Imet Memedi. 2017. Die Rolle der
Moschee im Integrationsprozess. ÖIF-Forschungsbericht. Vienna:
Österreichischer Integrationsfonds (ÖIF).
Hofer, Helmut, Gerlinde Titelbach, Doris Weichselbaumer and
Rudolf-Winter-Ebmer. 2013. Diskriminierung von MigrantInnen
am österreichischen Arbeitsmarkt. Vienna: Institut für Höhere
Studien (IHS). Retrieved July 8, 2018 from: https://www.
sozialministerium.at/cms/site/attachments/7/3/0/CH3434/
CMS1459843399534/10_diskriminierung_migrantinnen_
arbeitsmarkt1.pdf
Hollan, Katarina and Sonila Danaj. 2018. POOSH Country
Report in Austria. POOSH – Occupational Safety and Health of
Posted Workers: Depicting the existing and future challenges in assuring
decent working conditions and wellbeing of workers in hazardous sectors.
Retrieved March 18, 2019 from: https://www.euro.centre.
org/downloads/detail/3267
Institut für Empirische Sozialforschung (IFES). 2016.
Freiwilligenengagement. Bevölkerungsbefragung 2016. Studienbericht.
Vienna: Bundesministerium für Arbeit, Soziales und
Konsumentenschutz.
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).
2017. Sending Money Home: Contributing to the SDGs, one family at a
time. Retrieved December 12, 2018 from: https://www.ifad.org/
documents/38714170/39135645/Sending+Money+Home+-
+Contributing+to+the+SDGs%2C+one+family+at+a+ti
me.pdf/c207b5f1-9fef-4877-9315-75463fccfaa7
International Metalworkers’ Federation. 2009. Migrant
workers in the metal industry: results of the IMF survey. Geneva:
International Metalworkers’ Federation. Retrieved March
18, 2019 from: http://www.bollettinoadapt.it/old/files/
document/3029IMF_MIGRANT_WORK.pdf
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2008. Balance of Payments
Manual. Retrieved December 12, 20018 from: https://www.
imf.org/external/pubs/ft/bop/2007/pdf/appx5.pdf
König, Alexandra, Bernhard Perchinig, Jimy Perumadan and
Katharina Schaur. 2015. Country Report Austria. ITHACA
Research Report. Italy: European University Institute.
Kraler, Albert and David Reichel. 2011. “Measuring Irregular
Migration and Population Flows - What Available Data Can
Tell.” in International Migration 49(5):97-128.
Kraler, Albert and Karin Sohler. 2007. “Austria.” European
Immigration. A source book edited by Anna Triandafyllidou and
Ruby Gropas. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Lacroix, Thomas, Peggy Levitt and Ilka Vari-Lavoisier 2016.
“Social remittances and the changing transnational political
landscape” in Comparative Migration Studies 4(16)1-5.
Levitt, Peggy. 1998. “Social remittances. Migration driven
local-level forms of cultural diffusion.“ in The International
Migration Review 32(4):926-948.
Liegl, Barbara and Stefan Spitaler. 2008. Legionäre am Ball.
Migration im österreichischen Fußball nach 1945. Vienna: Braumüller.
Mercator Dialogue on Asylum and Migration (MEDAM).
2018. Flexible Solidarity: A comprehensive strategy for asylum and
immigration in the EU 2018. MEDAM assessment report on asylum
and migration policies in Europe. Kiel: Kiel Institute for the World
Economy (IfW) / MEDAM.
Meyer, Michael, Eva More-Hollerweger, Arno Heimgartner
and Stefanie Mackerle-Bixa. 2009. “Gesellschaftliche
Bedeutung von Freiwilligem Engagement im Internationalen
Diskurs.” Pp. 18-28 in Freiwilliges Engagement in Österreich. 1.
Freiwilligenbericht edited by Bundesministerium für Arbeit,
Soziales und Konsumentenschutz (BMASK). Vienna:
BMASK.
Migration Integration Policy Index (MIPEX). 2015. Key
findings Austria, 2014. Retrieved December 12, 2018 from:
http://www.mipex.eu/austria
Migrationsrat für Österreich. 2016. Migration verstehen –
Migration steuern. Vienna: Bundesministerium für Inneres
(BM.I). Retrieved December 12, 2018 from: https://www.
bmi.gv.at/Downloads/files/Migrationsratsbericht_Deutsch.
pdf
Ngo Tam, Téclaire and Regina Joschika. 2012. Linking Migration
and Development policies. Migrations- und Entwicklungspolitik in
Österreich. Oder: der Anspruch auf Kohärenz. Vienna: Südwind,
Vienna Institute for International Dialogue and Cooperation
(VIDC).
Obrovsky, Michael. 2016. „Remittances aus Österreich:
Überblick und Trends“ in Fluchtbedingte Migration –
Herausforderung für die EZA edited by Österreichische
Entwicklungspolitik (ÖFSE). Vienna: ÖFSE/ C3 – Centrum
für Internationale Entwicklung.
62
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2017. OECD Economic Surveys: Austria. Paris: OECD
Publishing. Retrieved December 1, 2018 from: https://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/eco_surveys-aut-2017-en
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2016. Erfolgreiche Integration. Flüchtlinge und sonstige
Schutzbedürftige. Paris: OECD Publishing. Retrieved December
12, 2018 from: https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264251632-de
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2015. Social Impact Investment. Building the evidence base.
Paris: OECD Publishing. Retrieved on January 30, 2019 from:
https://read.oecd-ilibrary.org/finance-and-investment/socialimpact-investment_9789264233430-en#page59
Patel, Aurvasi. 2018. “International Protection Needs of
Asylum-Seekers from Afghanistan.” Presentation at the
UNHCR Vienna Conference March 12, Vienna, Austria.
Pöschl, Magdalena. 2015. Migration und Mobilität: Gutachten
für den 19. Österreichischen Juristen Tagung. Vienna: Manz’sche
Verlags- und Universitätsbuchhandlung.
Prettenthaler Franz, Dominik Janisch, Karolin Gstinig,
Michael Kernitzkyi, Eric Kirschner, Veronika Kulmer,
Andreas Niederl and Claudia Winkler. 2016. Ökonomische
Effekte von Asylberechtigten in Österreich. Analyse der
arbeitsmarktrelevanten Zahlungsströme. Graz: Joanneum Research
Forschungsgesellschaft.
Rechnungshof Österreich. 2018. Nachhaltige Entwicklungsziele
der Vereinten Nationen, Umsetzung der Agenda 2030 in Österreich.
Bericht des Rechnungshofes. Retrieved December 12, 2018 from:
https://www.rechnungshof.gv.at/fileadmin/downloads/_
jahre/2018/Aktuelles/Entwicklungsziele_Vereinten_
Nationen_2030.pdf
Reiser, Karl M. 2009. „Echo aus der Community. Entwicklung
und Dynamik von MigrantInnenvereinen in Wien.“ Pp.343-
359 in Anthroplogie der Migration. Theoretische Grundlagen und
interdisziplinäre Aspekte edited by Maria Six-Hohenbalken and
Jelena Tosic. Vienna: WUV Facultas.
Rutz, Julia. 2018. The changing Influx of asylum seekers in 2014-2016:
Austria´s responses. Study of the national contact point Austria
in the European Migration Network (EMN). Vienna: IOM,
EMN. Retrieved May 6, 2018 from: http://www.emn.at/en/
emn-study-illegal-employment-of-third-country-nationals-inaustria-2017-2-2-2
Sarikakis, Katherine. 2017. “Austria. Good and Bad, but a
Lack of Accountability when Journalism Fails the Migration
Test” in How does the media on both sides of the Mediterranean
report on migration? A study by journalists, for journalists and policymakers edited by the Ethical Journalism Network. Retrieved
December 12, 2018 from: https://ethicaljournalismnetwork.
org/resources/publications/media-mediterranean-migration/
austria
Schmatz, Susi and Petra Wetzel. 2014. Migrantische Ökonomien
in Wien. Vienna: Kammer für Arbeiter und Angestellte für
Wien.
Schmeltzl, Wolfgang. 1913 [1549]. Ein Lobspruch der Hochlöblichen
weitberümbten Khünigklichen St6at Wienn in Osterreich edited by
Heinrich Diezel, 1913, Vienna.
Sieveking, Nadine, Margit Fauser and Thomas Faist. 2008.
Gutachten zum entwicklungspolitischen Engagement der in NRW
lebenden MigrantInnen afrikanischer Herkunft. Working paper Nr.
38. Bielefeld: University of Bielefeld / Centre on Migration,
Citizenship and Development (COMAC).
Skeldon, Ronald. 2008. “International Migration as a tool
in development policy: A passing phase?” Population and
Development Review 34(1):1-18.
Spiegelfeld, Alexander. 2018. Austria Annual Policy Report on
Migration and Asylum 2017. Vienna: International Organisation
for Migration (IOM)/ European Migration Network (EMN).
Retrieved December 12, 2018 from: https://www.emn.at/en/
publications/annual-reports/
Staritz, Cornelia and Stacey Frederick. 2016. Harnessing
Foreign Direct Investment for Local Development? Spillovers in Apparel
Global Value Chains in Sub-Saharan Africa. Vienna: Austrian
Foundation for Development Research (ÖFSE).
Temin, Mariam, Mark Montgomery, Sarah Engebretsen
and Kathryn Barker. 2013. Girls on the move: Adolescent girls &
migration in the developing world. A girls count report on adolescent girls.
New York: Population Council.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social
Affairs (UNDESA). 2017. The International Migration Report
2017: Highlights. Retrieved March 18, 2019 from: https://
www.un.org/development/desa/publications/internationalmigration-report-2017.html
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
2015. Subsidiär Schutzberechtigte in Österreich. Austria: UNHCR.
Retrieved December 12, 2018 from: https://www.unhcr.
org/dach/wp-content/uploads/sites/27/2017/03/Bericht_
subsidiaerer_Schutz.pdf
Waldrauch, Harald and Karin Sohler. 2004.
Migrantenorganisationen in der Großstadt. Entstehung, Strukturen und
Aktivitäten am Beispiel Wien. Frankfurt am Main: Campus.
63
Weinar, Agnieszka. 2010. “Instrumentalising Diaspora for
Development: International and European policy discourse”.
Pp. 73-89 in Diaspora and Transnationalism. Concepts, Theories and
Methods. International Migration, Integration and Social Cohesion in
Europe (IMISCOE) Research Series edited by Rainer Bauböck
and Thomas Faist. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Wirtschaftskammer Österreich (WKO). 2018. Tourismus
und Freizeitwirtschaft im Überblick. Ausgabe 2018. Retrieved
December 12, 2018 from: https://www.wko.at/branchen/
tourismus-freizeitwirtschaft/tourismus-freizeitwirtschaftueberblick-2018.pdf
Wojczewski, Silvia, Annelien Poppe, Kathryn Hoffmann,
Wim Peersman, Oathokwa Nkomazana, Stephen Pentz and
Ruth Kutalek. 2015. “Diaspora engagement of African migrant
health workers – examples from five destination countries” in
Global Health Action 8(1):1-10. Retrieved December 12, 2018
from: https://doi.org/10.3402/gha.v8.29210
World Bank. 2018. Migration and remittances. Recent Developments and
Outlook. Migration and Development Brief, No. 30, December
2018. Washington DC: World Bank. Retrieved January 5, 2019
from: https://www.knomad.org/sites/default/files/2018-12/
Migration%20and%20Development%20Brief%2030.pdf
List of legislati on/polici es
Austrian Development Agency (ADA). 2016. Focus Paper on
Migration and Development. Retrieved May 6, 2018 from: https://
www.entwicklung.at/fileadmin/user_upload/Dokumente/
Publikationen/Fokuspapiere/Englisch/Focus_on_
Migration_and_Development_Oct2016.pdf
Arbeitsgemeinschaft Entwicklungszusammenarbeit (AGEZ).
2007. Migration und Entwicklung. Positionspapier, December 7,
2007. Retrieved May 6, 2018 from: http://www.oneworld.at/
agez/Migration-und-entwicklung.pdf
Bundesministerium für Europa, Integration und
Äußeres (BMEIA). 2018. Gemeinsam. Für unsere Welt.
Dreijahresprogramm der österreichischen Entwicklungspolitik 2019-
2021. Retrieved January 10, 2019 from: https://www.
bundeskanzleramt.gv.at/documents/131008/998855/28_25_
dreijahresprogramm_2019-21_NB.pdf/42bca4f8-739b-4673-
9c43-56e37e6cd8ff
Bundesministerium für europäische und internationale
Angelegenheiten (BMEIA). 2017. Zukunft braucht Entwicklung.
Entwicklung braucht Zukunft. Dreijahresprogramm der österreichischen
Entwicklungspolitik 2016 bis 2018. Aktualisierung 2017.
Retrieved May 6, 2018 from: https://www.entwicklung.at/
fileadmin/user_upload/Dokumente/Publikationen/3_JP/
Aktualisierung2017_Dreijahresprogramm_2016-2018.pdf
Bundesministerium für europäische und internationale
Angelegenheiten (BMEIA). 2016a. Dreijahresprogramm der
österreichischen Entwicklungspolitik 2016 bis 2018. Retrieved
May 6, 2018 from: http://www.entwicklung.at/fileadmin/
user_upload/Dokumente/Publikationen/3_JP/2016-2018_
Dreijahresprogramm.pdf
Bundesministerium für Europa, Integration und Äußeres
(BMEIA). 2016b. Zukunft braucht Entwicklung. Entwicklung
braucht Zukunft. Dreijahresprogramm der österreichischen
Entwicklungspolitik 2016-2018. Aktualisierung 2017. Retrieved
May 6, 2018 from: https://www.entwicklung.at/
fileadmin/user_upload/Dokumente/Publikationen/3_JP/
Aktualisierung_Dreijahresprogramm_2016-2018.pdf
Bundesministerium für europäische und internationale
Angelegenheiten (BMEIA). 2012. Dreijahresprogramm der
österreichischen Entwicklungspolitik 2013 bis 2015. Retrieved
May 6, 2018 from: http://www.entwicklung.at/fileadmin/
user_upload/Dokumente/Publikationen/3_JP/2013-2015_
Dreijahresprogramm.pdf
Globale Verantwortung. 2013. Position Paper on Migration and
Development. Position paper, December 3, 2013. Retrieved May 6,
2018 from: https://www.globaleverantwortung.at/images/doku/
positionspapier_agmigrationentwicklung_jaenner2014_engl.pdf
SDG Watch Austria. 2018a. Brief an Bundeskanzler. May 24.
Retrieved December 12, 2018 from: https://sdgwatchatlive-8893156df82d48b0bb53d2-309f0d2.aldryn-media.com/
filer_public/1a/18/1a18a656-a7d8-461e-ab0a-dee931b08e68/
sdg-watch-austria_umsetzungagenda2030_hbk-kurz_mai18.
pdf
United Nations (UN) Secretary General. 2017. Making migration
work for all. Report of the Secretary-General. Retrieved December
12, 2018 from: https://refugeesmigrants.un.org/sites/default/
files/sg_report_en.pdf
United Nations (UN). 1948. Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. December 10. Retrieved on May 18 from: http://www.
un.org/en/universal-declaration-human-rights/
List of articl es
Der Standard. 2018a. „Regierung fixiert Ende der Lehre für
Asylwerber.“ August 26. Retrieved December 12, 2018 from:
https://derstandard.at/2000086070416/FPOe-will-Zugangzur-Lehre-fuer-Asylwerbern-wieder-verbieten
Der Standard. 2018b. „Budgetmittel für Integration an Schulen
werden 2019 halbiert.“ March 12. Retrieved December 12,
2018 from: https://derstandard.at/2000075944183/Mittelfuer-Integration-an-Schulen-werden-halbiert
64
Die Presse. 2011. „Kurz und die bosnischen
Gastarbeitermillionen.“ October 7. Retrieved May
20, 2018 from: https://diepresse.com/home/politik/
innenpolitik/699280/Kurz-und-die-bosnischenGastarbeitermillionen
Wiener Zeitung. 2018a. „Türken in Österreich wählen zu
70 Prozent Erdogan.“ June 25. Retrieved June 28, 2018
from: https://www.wienerzeitung.at/nachrichten/welt/
weltpolitik/973195_Tuerken-in-Oesterreich-waehlen-zu-70-
Prozent-Erdogan.html
Wiener Zeitung. 2018b. „Der fünfzehnte Überschuss
in Folge.“ May 8. Retrieved December 12, 2018 from:
https://www.wienerzeitung.at/nachrichten/wirtschaft/
oesterreich/963717_Der-fuenfzehnte-Ueberschuss-in-Folge.
html
Wiener Zeitung..2018c. „Weniger Geld für Integration.“
February 2. Retrieved December 12, 2018 from: https://www.
wienerzeitung.at/nachrichten/oesterreich/politik/950023_
Weniger-Geld-fuer-Integration.html
List of internet sources
Amt der Niederösterreichischen (NÖ) Landesregierung.
n.d. „17 und wir. SDG-Wettbewerb in Niederösterreich.“
Retrieved January 15, 2019 from: https://17undwir.at/
Allianz Nachhaltige Universitäten in Österreich. n.d.
„Gesellschaftliche Verantwortung.“ Retrieved December
12, 2018 from: http://nachhaltigeuniversitaeten.at/
gesellschaftliche-verantwortung/
Austrian Development Agency (ADA). n.d.a. “Projekte.”
Retrieved on May 4, 2018 from: https://www.entwicklung.at/
projekte/detail/project/
Austrian Development Agency (ADA). n.d.b. “AfrikaFestwochen Ke.Nako.Afrika Jetzt! 2010.” Retrieved on May
4, 2018 from: https://www.entwicklung.at/en/projects/detailen/project/show/afrika-festwochen-kenakoafrika-jetzt-2010/
Boller, Thomas. 2018. “Labour & Employment: Austria.”
Retrieved March 18, 2019 from: https://gettingthedealthrough.
com/area/18/jurisdiction/25/labour-employment-austria/
Bundesministerium für Europa, Integration und Äußeres
(BMEIA). n.d. “ Einreise und Aufenthalt in Österreich.“
Retrieved December 12, 2018 from: https://www.bmeia.
gv.at/reise-aufenthalt/einreise-und-aufenthalt-in-oesterreich/
Dijaspora online. 2017a. „Projekt Link Up Serbia präsentiert
an der Westbalkan-Konferenz.“ September 28. Retrieved May
29, 2018 from: http://dijaspora.tv/de/projekt-link-up-serbiapraesentiert-an-der-westbalkan-konferenz/
Dijaspora online. 2017b. „2018 wird das Investitionszentrum
der serbischen Diaspora gegründet!“ December 29.
Retrieved May 29, 2018 from: http://dijaspora.tv/de/dasinvestitionszentrum-der-serbischen-diaspora-gegruendet/
Fanizadeh, Michael. 2012. “Über Diaspora Engagement in
Österreich.” Vienna Institute for International Dialogue and
Cooperation (VIDC), September 13. Retrieved May 29, 2018
from: http://www.vidc.org/news/news-222012/michaelfanizadeh-ueber-diaspora-engagement-in-oesterreich/
Globale Verantwortung. 2018a. „Täglich grüßt das
Murmeltier. Österreich bei Phantomhilfe wieder in Europas
Spitzenfeld.“ October 18. Retrieved December 12, 2018 from:
https://www.globaleverantwortung.at/taeglich-gruesst-dasmurmeltier-oesterreich-bei-phantomhilfe-wieder-in-europasspitzenfeld
Globale Verantwortung. 2018b. „Dreijahresprogramm der
Österreichischen Entwicklungszusammenarbeit 2019-2021.
Eine Einschätzung.“ Retrieved January 15, 2019 from:
https://www.globaleverantwortung.at/dreijahresprogrammder-oesterreichischen-entwicklungszusammenarbeit-2019-
2021-eine-einschaetzung
Globale Verantwortung. n.d. „SDG BotschafterInnen.
Junge Menschen engagieren sich.“ Retrieved December
12, 2018 from: https://www.globaleverantwortung.at/sdgbotschafterinnen-junge-menschen-engagieren-sich
International Center for Migration Policy Development
(ICMPD). 2016. “ICMPD supports Diasporas – because they
matter.” June 23. Retrieved on May 20, 2018 from: https://
www.icmpd.org/diaspora/#c10350
International Centre for Migration Policy Development
(ICMPD). n.d.a “ICMPD supports diasporas – because they
matter.” Retrieved December 12, 2018 from: https://www.
icmpd.org/diaspora/
International Centre for Migration Policy Development
(ICMPD). n.d.b “Link Up! Serbia – Feasibility study.
Facilitating Diaspora Investments.” Retrieved from: https://
www.icmpd.org/our-work/capacity-building/regions/
western-balkans-and-turkey/completed-projects/
Jones, Syd. 2010. “Austrian Americans.” Retrieved February
18, 2019 from: https://www.everyculture.com/multi/A-Br/
Austrian-Americans.html#ixzz5hENEhWrt
65
Medien-Servicestelle Neue Österreicher/innen (MSNÖ).
2016. „AusländerInnen in Österreich: Entwicklungen und
aktuelle Trends.“ Retrieved December 12, 2018 from: http://
medienservicestelle.at/migration_bewegt/2016/07/11/
auslaenderinnen-in-oesterreich-entwicklungen-und-aktuelletrends/
Medien-Servicestelle Neue Österreicher/innen (MSNÖ).
2013. „Kultur & Kunst: Deutsche Primgeiger.“ February
13. Retrieved June 6, 2018 from: http://medienservicestelle.
at/migration_bewegt/2013/02/13/kultur-kunst-deutscheprimgeiger/
Medien-Servicestelle Neue Österreicher/innen (MSNÖ).
2012. „Jeder dritte Bundesliga-Nachwuchskicker ist
Migrant.“ June 5. Retrieved June 6, 2018 from: http://
medienservicestelle.at/migration_bewegt/2012/06/05/etwajeder-dritte-bundesliga-nachwuchskicker-ist-migrant/
Medien-Servicestelle Neue Österreicher/innen (MSNÖ). 2011.
„Neuere österreichische Migrationsgeschichte.“ Retrieved
December 12, 2018 from: http://medienservicestelle.at/
migration_bewegt/2011/05/25/neue-osterreichischemigrationsgeschichte/
Migrant Integration Policy Index (MIPEX). 2015. “Austria
2014. Key findings.” Retrieved July 20, 2018 from: http://
www.mipex.eu/austria
Obrovsky, Michael. 2018. „Neues Dreijahresprogramm der
österreichischen Entwicklungspolitik – Fortschreibung der verpassten
Chancen.“ Retrieved January 15, 2019 from: https://www.oefse.
at/publikationen/aktueller-kommentar/aktueller-kommentarseptember-2018/
Obrovsky, Michael. 2017. „2017 – Jahr der Trendwende
in der OEZA?“ Retrieved January 15, 2019 from: https://
www.oefse.at/publikationen/aktueller-kommentar/aktuellerkommentar-jaenner-2017
Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB). n.d. “Foreign direct
investment.” Retrieved December 12, 2018 from: https://
www.oenb.at/en/Statistics/Standardized-Tables/externalsector/foreign-direct-investment.html
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD).2018. “Development stable in 2017 with more
sent to poorest countries.” April 4. Retrieved December 12,
2018 from: http://www.oecd.org/development/financingsustainable-development/development-finance-data/ODA2017-detailed-summary.pdf
Paulus, Mareike. 2015. „Migrantinnnen als
Entwicklungsakteure (Forum 2).“ January 27. Retrieved June
6 from: https://www.pfz.at/article1699.htm
SDG Watch Austria..2018b. „Bericht zum österreichischen
SDG-Forum 2018.“ November 30. Retrieved December
12, 2018 from: https://www.sdgwatch.at/de/was-wirtun/blog/2018/11/bericht-zum-osterreichischen-sdgforum-2018/
Stadt Graz Umweltamt. 2017. Ökostadt Graz.
Retrieved January 15, 2019 from: http://www.
umwelt.graz.at/cms/dokumente/10283128_6703492/
af81c930/%C3%96KOSTADT%20Graz_170130.pdf
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
N.d. “What is a Refugee”. Retrieved March 18, 2019 from:
http://www.unhcr.org/what-is-a-refugee.html
Vienna Institute for International Dialogue and Cooperation
(VIDC). 2011. “Migration and Development – participation
of the African diaspora in the development policy discourse.”
June 30. Retrieved May 29, 2018 from: http://www.vidc.org/
themen/archiv/archiv-einzelansicht/article/migration-undentwicklung-partizipation-der-afrikanischen-diaspora-imentwicklungspolitischen-di/?cHash=5e4bac53cb894bec24dd
81f2b5d54cfe
Vienna Institute for International Dialogue and Cooperation
(VIDC). n.d. “CoMiDe – Initiative für Migration und
Entwicklung.” Retrieved from: http://www.vidc.org/
themen/migration/comide/
Zivilcourage und Anti-Rassismus-Arbeit (ZARA). 2018.
„Weitere Zunahme rassistischer Vorfälle – Online Hass und
Hetze auf neuem Höchststand. Presseaussendung ZARA
zum Rassismus Report 2017.“ March 21. Retrieved December
12, 2018 from: https://www.zara.or.at/_wp/wp-content/
uploads/2018/03/ZARA_PA_Rassismus_Report2017_fin.
pdf
List of data sources
Arbeitsmarktservice Österreich (AMS). 2017. Erteilte
Beschäftigungsbewilligungen aufgrund eines Kontingents.
Einzelauswertung. Vienna: AMS.
Bundesministerium für Inneres (BM.I). 2018a. Niederlassungsund Aufenthaltsstatistik. November 2018. Retrieved January
15, 2019 from: https://www.bmi.gv.at/302/Statistik/
files/2018/Niederlassungs-_und_Aufenthaltsstatistik_
November_2018.pdf
Bundesministerium für Inneres (BM.I). 2018b. Vorläufige
Asylstatistik November 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2019
from: https://www.bmi.gv.at/301/Statistiken/files/2018/
Asylstatistik_November_2018.pdf
66
Bundesministerium für Inneres (BM.I). 2017. Vorläufige
Asylstatistik Dezember 2017. Retrieved December 12, 2018
from: https://www.bmi.gv.at/301/Statistiken/files/2017/
Asylstatistik_Dezember2017.pdf
Bundesministerium für Inneres (BM.I). 2016. Vorläufige
Asylstatistik Dezember 2016. Retrieved May 2, 2018 from: http://
www.bmi.gv.at/301/Statistiken/files/2016/Asylstatistik_
Dezember_2016.pdf
Bundesministerium für Inneres (BM.I). 2015. Vorläufige
Asylstatistik Dezember 2015. Retrieved May 2, 2018 from: http://
www.bmi.gv.at/301/Statistiken/files/2015/Asylstatistik_
Dezember_2015.pdf
Oesterreichische Nationalbank (OeNB). 2017. “Outward
direct investments broken down by industry.” Retrieved
December 12, 2018 from: https://www.oenb.at/isaweb/
report.do?lang=EN&report=9.3.11
Statistics Austria and Kommission für Migrations- und
Integrationsforschung der Österreichischen Akademie
der Wissenschaften (KMI). 2017. Migration und Integration.
Zahlen. Daten. Indikatoren 2017. Vienna: Statistics Austria/
Kommission für Migrations- und Integrationsforschung der
Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. Retrieved
May 6, 2018 from: https://www.integrationsfonds.at/
publikationen/zahlen-fakten/statistisches-jahrbuch-2017/
Statistics Austria. 2018a. “Population statistics” Retrieved
January 15, 2019 from http://www.statistik.at/web_de/
statistiken/menschen_und_gesellschaft/bevoelkerung/
bevoelkerungsstruktur/bevoelkerung_nach_alter_
geschlecht/index.html
Statistics Austria. 2018b. “Wanderungsstatistik” Retrieved
June 6, 2018 from: https://www.statistik.at/web_de/
statistiken/menschen_und_gesellschaft/bevoelkerung/
wanderungen/index.html
Statistics Austria. 2017a. “Population statistics” Retrieved
May 4, 2018 from: http://www.statistik.at/web_de/
statistiken/menschen_und_gesellschaft/bevoelkerung/
bevoelkerungsstruktur/bevoelkerung_nach_alter_
geschlecht/index.html
Statistics Austria. 2017b. “Labour Force Survey
(Microcensus)” Retrieved June 5, 2018 from: http://www.
statistik.at/web_de/statistiken/menschen_und_gesellschaft/
arbeitsmarkt/erwerbsstatus/index.html
Wirtschaftskammer Österreich (WKO). 2018. Statistisches
Jahrbuch 2018. Retrieved December 12, 2018 from: http://wko.
at/statistik/jahrbuch/2018_Deutsch.pdf
Wirtschaftskammer Österreich (WKO). 2017. Auswertungen
zum Migrationshintergrund der Wirtschaftskammermitglieder. Vienna:
WKO.
World Bank. 2017. “Migration and Remittances Data.
Bilateral Remittances Matrix 2017” Retrieved December
12, 2018 from: http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/
migrationremittancesdiasporaissues/brief/migrationremittances-data
Graph
Statistics Austria. 2017. „Wanderungssaldo 1961-2016 nach
Staatsangehörigkeit“. Retrieved May 2, 2018 from: https://
www.statistik.at/web_de/statistiken/menschen_und_
gesellschaft/bevoelkerung/wanderungen/wanderungen_
mit_dem_ausland_aussenwanderungen/index.html
67
179 States/governments participating, the ICPD (declaration
and) a forward-looking, 20-year Programme of Action
(extended in 2010) continues to serve as a comprehensive guide
to people-centred development progress. https://www.unfpa.
org/fr/node/9038
7 GMPA. The Sustainable Development Goals and Migrants/
Migration Regarding the UN 2030 Sustainable Development
Agenda: Relevant SDGs and Targets, Rationales for Inclusion,
Implementation Actions, and Realization Measurement
Indicators. Global Migration Policy Associates. Prepared
by Patrick Taran and multiple contributors. Revised
2018. Available at: www.un.org/en/development/desa/
population/migration/events/coordination/14/documents/
backgrounddocs/GMPA_14CM.pdf
8 UN General Assembly resolution 71/1, New York Declaration
for Refugees and Migrants, A/RES/71/1 (19 September 2016).
Available at: http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.
asp?symbol=A/RES/71/1
9 A first analysis on the influence on immigration to the Austrian
society has been made by Biffl and Schütz (2004) on the basis
of secondary data analysis and desk research.
10 Statistics Austria categorises economic activities based on the
OENACE 2008 classification; for more details please refer to:
http://www.statistik.at/KDBWeb/kdb_VersionAuswahl.
do?KDBtoken=null&versID=10438&sprache=EN
1 1In agriculture and forestry the proportion of foreign citizens
is very low.
12 The quota applies also for citizens from Croatia.
13 Only third-country nationals are subject to authorization.
The Austrian Public Employment Service (AMS) collects data
of annual employment permits but not the number of people
or the type of residence. Therefore, the total number of seasonal
workers and whether they are permanently or temporarily living
in Austria is not known. However, a person can obtain several
temporary employment permits in one year; this is particularly
the case in agriculture and forestry.
14 Further specification with regard to nationalities is due to
sampling errors not possible.
15 Individual companies are among the most often applied legal
forms in Austria. Owners operate as sole proprietor at one’s
own account and name. Owners can also be leaseholders.
16 The term “persons with migrant background” takes into
account foreign citizens and Austrian citizens who have
been born abroad. The list of sectors might include multiple
Notes
1 Human rights can be defined as protections for individuals
and groups, guaranteed under international law, against
interferences with fundamental freedoms and human dignity.
Human rights are inalienable and cannot be denied to or
relinquished by any human being, regardless of any reason
including legal or immigration status. They are universal
in that they apply to everyone, everywhere. Human rights
encompass civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights,
and are indivisible, meaning that the different sets of rights
are all equally important for the full development of human
beings and his/her well-being. Human rights instruments
and customary international law generate three overarching
obligations for States, namely: to respect, to protect, and to
fulfil those rights.
2 European Council Directive 2004/83/EC on minimum
standards for the qualification and status of third country
nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as persons who
otherwise need international protection and the content of
the protection granted. Available at: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32004L0083
3 UN General Assembly resolution 45/158, International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of Their Families, A/RES/45/158 (18
December 1990). Available at: http://www.un.org/documents/
ga/res/45/a45r158.htm
4 As noted in UNDESA estimates, “The estimates are based on
official statistics on the foreign-born or the foreign population,
classified by sex, age and country of origin. Most of the statistics
utilised to estimate the international migrant stock were
obtained from population censuses. Additionally, population
registers and nationally representative surveys provided
information on the number and composition of international
migrants.”
5 UN General Assembly resolution 70/1, Transforming our
world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
A/RES/70/L.1 (25 September 2015). Available at:
http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/
RES/70/1&Lang=E , paragraph 8.
6 The ICPD was the biggest conference ever held on population,
migration and development with 11,000 delegates from 179
countries and some 4,000 participants in the parallel NGO
Forum. It articulated a bold new vision about the relationships
between population, development and individual well-being.
Two of the ten chapters of the Programme of Action were
entirely about migration and development, comprising an
extensive framework, most of whose elements were reflected –
although less amply– in subsequent frameworks. Adopted by all
68
for migrants. MIPEX collects indicators on labour market
mobility, family reunion, access to education and health,
possibilities for long-term residence, access to political
participation, the citizenship and anti-discriminatory measures.
25 Citizen from Croatia need an employment permit due
to transitional arrangements regarding the free movement
of workers. The Austrian government has prolonged the
transitional phase until June 2020.
26 There are two types of cards: the RWR-Card and the RWRCard plus. While the R-W-R Card can be issued upon first
arrival for the first year of employment if access to work with
a specific employer is given (employer nomination), the “Plus”
card can be obtained after one year allowing free access to work
in Austria. The EU Blue Card can be granted to third country
nationals with a university degree and a gross annual income
surpassing at least 1.5 times the average gross annual income
of a full-time employee in Austria. In 2018, the gross annual
income was at least €60,948 which is about €4,353 gross
monthly income plus special payments.
27 Since 2017 asylum seekers are allowed under certain
conditions to do a voluntary traineeship, summer traineeships
or internships. Other employment possibilities refer to
low skilled work in asylum seeker accommodations or for
Federal, Provincial or municipal authorities against a financial
compensation for the work performed. In 2017, the Service
Employment Cheque Act for less skilled work in private
households under the limit of small scale employment
was extended to asylum seekers. However, asylum seekers
cannot earn more than €110 per month in addition to their
basic subsistence by the state. If more income is generated
while receiving basic subsistence allowances, corresponding
compensations must be paid.
28 See ILO website page on Ratifications for Austria available at:
https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:1
1200:0::NO::P11200_COUNTRY_ID:102549
29Since 2017, in the course of the Integration Act (IntG) the
integration agreement further demands an exam on the legal
and social system in Austria besides language skills (“integration
exam”). (Integration Act §1)
30 Referring primarily to the participation in institutional
spheres such as the labour market, housing, education among
others but also to notions of belongings
31 Visa D are national visa, which entitle the holder to stay for
a period from 91 days up to six months in Austria. They can
be issued for single or multiple entries. Inter alia Visa D are
issued in order to collect a residence permit (Aufenthaltstitel)
straight after arrival. A (national) visa D, issued by Austria or
memberships in different federal states (“Bundesländer”) and
sectors (WKO 2017).
17 The analysis includes social contributions of employees
and workers, consisting out of social security contributions
(health, unemployment, old-age and casualty insurances) and
salary-dependent levies (family burdens equalisation fund,
contributions to the Austrian chamber of labour, contributions
to the insurance against non-payment in the case of insolvency
and the contribution to housing subsidies). Only cash
benefits are included, which have a share of 70% of all social
expenditures in Austria.
18 Data on the voluntary commitment of migrants in Austria
is only collected since 2013 (BMASK 2015). The IFESsurvey collected data on migrant backgrounds, not on the
citizenship. Persons with migrant background include those
who immigrated to Austria (1st generation of newcomers)
as well as persons with at least one immigrant parent (2nd
generation). Since the survey was conducted in German, the
group of newcomers is not entirely represented.
19 While migrants’ organisations have a collective, more or less
homogenous identity and possess a specific (either informal
or formalised) form of organisation, the diaspora refers to
transnational networks, groups and communities that relate in
a broad sense to the migrants’ countries or regions of origin.
It has to be noted that the term diaspora assumes a certain
collectivity, however, the diaspora is very diverse. (Sieveking,
Fauser and Faist 2008; Weinar 2010)
20 For migrants’ organisations from former Yugoslavia, Turkey,
Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary and Poland in Vienna and
an overview of migrants’ organisations in Vienna see Waldrauch
and Sohler 2004
21 Investments below this threshold are either called “portfolio
investments” or “other investments.”
22 For a video on You Tube of the school project visit https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=YdWHyzmwUjw
23 a.o.: Coordinator for Football for Development project for five
European countries and six African Countries; member of the
board of directors for Football Against Racism in Europe until
2011; project Coordinator for FIFA, UEFA, United Nations
Office for Sport for Development and Peace and the European
Commission; Ghana Fan Ambassador to FIFA World Cup in
Germany 2006; recipient of The Culture Prize of the city of
Innsbruck in 2011 and the chairman of International Scientific
Network on Sports for Development
24 At least in every four years the Migrant Integration Policy
Index (MIPEX) provides information on integration policies
69
another Schengen state, entitles the holder to move about freely
in the territory of the other Schengen member states for up to
90 days per period of 180 days, given that he/she has a valid
travel document and fulfils the entry requirements as laid down
in Article 6(1)(a), (c) and (e) of the Regulation (EU) 2016/399
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March
2016 on a Union Code on the rules governing the movement
of persons across borders (Schengen Borders Code). Above, the
applicant must not appear in the national list of alerts of the
Member State concerned. If a person intends to stay more than
six months in Austria, he/she needs to apply for a residence
permit (Aufenthaltstitel). (BMEIA n.d.)
32 Corruption Perception Index 2017 by Transparency
International. Available at: https://www.transparency.org/
news/feature/corruption_perceptions_index_2017
33 UN General Assembly resolution 70/1, Transforming
our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
A/RES/70/L.1 (25 September 2015). Available at:
http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/
RES/70/1&Lang=E , preamble.
34 Besides fighting poverty, sustainable economies, environment
and climate protection, peace and security
35Austria follows a „trio-approach“ supporting 1) constitutional
structures (e.g. security sector, combat organized crime and
human trafficking) and good governance; 2) vocational
education and training, with a focus on youth; and 3)
developing the private sector including business partnerships,
industrialisation and technological development. (BMEIA
2018:10)

71
Annexes
Annex 1
List of ACRONYMS AND abbreviations
AGEZ Working Group for Development Cooperation
(Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Entwicklungszusammenarbeit)
AK Chamber of Labour (Österreichische
Bundesarbeitskammer)
AKIS Afghan Culture, Integration and Solidarity
(Afghanische Kultur, Integration und Solidarität)
AMS Austrian Public Employment Service
(Arbeitsmarktservice Österreich)
A-NI Austrian-Nigerian Initiative
BMASK Federal Ministry for Labour, Social Affairs and
Consumer Protection (Bundesministerium für Arbeit,
Soziales und Konsumentenschutz)
BMEIA Federal Ministry for Europa, Integration and Foreign
Affairs (Bundesministerium für Europa, Integration und
Äußeres)
BMI Federal Ministry for the Interior (Bundesministerium
für Inneres)
CoMiDe Initiative for Migration and Development
CONCORD European NGO confederation for relief and
development
CST Catholic Social Teaching
DAC Development Assistance Committee of the Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development
EFTA European Free Trade Association
EMN European Migration Network
EU European Union
GCM Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration
GCR Global Compact on Refugees
HASCO Help Afghan School Children
ICMPD International Centre for Migration Policy
Development
IDP s Internally displaced people
IFES Institute for Empirical Social Studies (Institut für
empirische Sozialforschung)
IMF International Monetary Fund
IOM International Organization for Migration (Internationale
Organisation für Migration)
MIPE X Migrant Integration Policy Index
MSNÖ Media-Service centre New Austrians (MedienServicestelle Neue Österreicher/innen)
NGO Non-governmental Organisation
OD A Official Development Assistance
OE CD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations
UNDHR Universal Declaration of Human Rights
UNDP United Nations of Development Programme
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioners for Refugees
UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organisation
UNOD C United Nations Office on Drug and Crime
WKO Austrian Economic Chamber (Wirtschaftskammer
Österreich)
VAS Association of African Students in Austria
VIDC Vienna Institute for International Dialogue and
Cooperation
72
Annex 2:
List of FIGURES
Figure 1: Migration balance in Austria 1961-2016 disaggregated by citizenship (Number of persons)......................15
Figure 2: Top-15 Nationalities living in Austria as per 01.01.2018....................................................................................................16
Figure 3: Foreign labour force in Austria by citizenship and sex 2017 (as % of total).......................................................................20
Figure 4: Remittances sent from Austria in million USD in 2017 (countries receiving over 30 mn. USD....................26
Figure 5: Remittances received by Austria in million USD (starting from 20 mn. USD) in 2017.................................27
Figure 6: Outward direct investment positions broken down by region in 2017 .............................................................28
Annex 3:
List of MIGRANTS` ORGANISATIONS WEBSITES
Organisation Website
ADEPT – the Africa-Europe Diaspora Development Platform http://www.adept-platform.org/
AKIS - Afghan Cultural Association http://akiseu.com
African Diaspora Youth Forum in Europe (ADYFE) https://www.adyfe.eu
ALODO – Helping Hands http://www.alodo.org/
Austrian-Afghan society http://oeafg.at/en/index.php
Austrian-Nigerian Initiative (A-NI) http://www.a-ni.org/index_english.html
Austrian-Ugandan Friendship Association http://www.austria-uganda.at
Association of African Students in Austria (VAS Austria) http://www.vas-oesterreich.at/
Barka Barka http://www.barkabarka.uio.at/
Chiala – Association for the promotion of culture, diversity and development https://chiala.at/
Guatemala Solidarity Austria http://www.guatemala.at/navegation_oben/kontakt/kontakt.html
HASCO - Help Afghan School Children http://www.help-afghan-school-children.org/newsreportsd.htm
JOADRE https://joadre.com/
NGO Exit https://joadre.com/de/ngo-exit-fighting-human-trafficking/
Radio Afrika TV http://www.radioafrika.net/
73
Annex 4:
List of interviewees
Name Position Organisation, Direction
Bella Bello Bitugu, Dr. Director University of Ghana, Sports Directorate
P.O. Box LG 25, Legon, Accra
Petra Dannecker; Univ.-Prof. Dr., MA Institute director University of Vienna, Institute for International Development
Sensengasse 3/2/2, 1090 Vienna
Youssouf Diakité, Mag. Representative Association of African Students (VAS) and African Diaspora Youth Forum
in Europe (ADYFE)
Türkenstraße 3, 1090 Vienna
Michael Fanizadeh, Mag. Project Coordinator The Vienna Institute for International Dialogue and Cooperation (VIDC)
Möllwaldplatz 5/3, 1040 Vienna
Karin Fischer, BA Advisor Governance,
Human Rights &
Migration
Austrian Development Agency (ADA)
Zelinkagasse 2, 1010 Vienna
Joseph Kitayimbwa Chairman Austrian-Ugandan Society for Friendship
Wichtelgasse 39a/3/8, 1160 Vienna
Koman Jean B. Kponyi-Dzaka, Dip. Päd. Chairman ALODO – Helping Hands, Association
Feldgasse 18/3, 2353 Guntramsdorf
Ghousudden Mir Managing Director AKIS Afghan Culture Association
Pastorstrasse 39-33/51/4, 1210 Vienna
Alexis Neuberg, Mag. Chairman Radio Afrika TV
Hofmühlgasse 2, 1060 Vienna
Téclaire Ngo Tam, Mag. Education Officer Südwind Association, Non-Profit Organisation
Laudongasse 40, 1080 Vienna
Gunter Schall, Dr. Head of Private Sector
and Development
Austrian Development Agency (ADA)
Zelinkagasse 2, 1010 Vienna
Annelies Vilim, Mag. Managing Director Global Responsibility, Platform for Development and Humanitarian Aid
Apollogasse 4/9, 1070 Vienna
Robert Zeiner, Mag. Director Programmes
and Projects International
Austrian Development Agency (ADA)
Zelinkagasse 2, 1010 Vienna
Caritas Austria
Albrechtskreithgasse 19-21
A-1160 Vienna
www.caritas.at
This publication was produced in the framework of the MIND
project, which has received financial support from
the DEAR Programme of the European Union and from the Austrian
Development Cooperation. The information
contained in this publication does not necessarily reflect the
position or opinion of the European Union or of the
Austrian Development Cooperation.
ISBN: 978-3-200-06360-0