Category: Safety and Harassment.

Code of Conduct
&
Explanatory Notes
Including the Secretary-General’s
bulletin on special measures for
protection from sexual exploitation
and sexual abuse (ST/SGB/2003/13)
June 2004
UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR
UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR
UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR
UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR - UNHCR
© UNHCR, 2010. All rights reserved.
Reproduction and dissemination for educational or other non-commercial
purposes is authorized without any prior written permission from the
copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged. Reproduction
for resale or other commercial purposes, or translation for any purpose, is
prohibited without the written permission of the copyright holders.
Applications for such permission should be addressed to the Ethics Office,
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), at
ethicsoffice@unhcr.org
CONTENTS
Introduction 1
Core Values and Guiding Principles 3
Commitment to the UNHCR Code of Conduct 5
Notes on the Code of Conduct 11
Nine Guiding Principles 16
Secretary-General’s bulletin 37
on Special Measures for Protection from
Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse
Contact Information 43

OFFICE OF THE UNITED NATIONS HIGH
COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES
(UNHCR)
CODE OF CONDUCT
_______________
INTRODUCTION
UNHCR’s capacity to ensure the protection of and
assistance to refugees and other persons of concern
depends on the ability of its staff to uphold and
promote the highest standards of ethical and
professional conduct. We, the staff members of
UNHCR, are personally and collectively responsible
for maintaining these standards. Managers have a
particular responsibility to uphold these standards, to
set a good example, and to create a working
environment that supports and empowers staff.
It is recognized that UNHCR’s work often puts its
staff in positions of power in relation to its
beneficiaries. Staff have an obligation not to abuse this
power.
This Code of Conduct is intended to serve as an
illustrative guide for staff to make ethical decisions in
their professional lives, and at times in their private
lives. It is a moral code that does not have the force of
law. It is designed to assist staff to better understand
the obligations placed upon their conduct by the
Charter of the United Nations and the Staff
Regulations and Rules, which remain the only legal
instruments that determine acceptable conduct in
UNHCR. Signing the Code does not take away any
acquired rights of UNHCR Staff.
While acknowledging that local laws and customs may
differ from one country to another, the Code of
Conduct is based on international legal standards and
outlined in the Secretary-General’s bulletin
ST/SGB/2003/13. For example, children are defined
as those under the age of 18 years. Guidance on
appropriate interpretation can be found in the Notes to
the Code of Conduct (see pg.33).
The Code applies to all UNHCR staff members who
are all requested to sign it. Persons holding a UNHCR
consultant contract, UNVs and interns will also
receive the Code and be requested to confirm that they
uphold its standards as far as applicable to their status.
Governmental and non-governmental organizations
and companies which, through their employees, work
for UNHCR, will be requested to make the principles
contained in the Code known to those persons in an
appropriate manner.
All UNHCR staff are responsible for encouraging,
advocating and promoting the dissemination of the
Code of Conduct. They also have a role in
implementing, monitoring and enforcing its standards.
Staff are also urged to encourage partners to adhere to
these standards and to join UNHCR staff in upholding
them.
CORE VALUES AND GUIDING
PRINCIPLES
UNHCR staff are committed to the following
fundamental values and principles:
• As staff working within the UN system, we will
ensure that our conduct is consistent with and
reflects the values enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations: respect for fundamental human
rights, social justice and human dignity, and respect
for the equal rights of men and women. We will
assist UNHCR to actively promote adherence to the
principles of international refugee law, international
human rights law and international humanitarian
law. We will be guided by the core values of the UN
system, including professionalism, integrity and
respect for diversity, and will maintain an
international perspective at all times.
• As UNHCR staff, our primary commitment is to
ensure the protection of and assistance to refugees
and other persons of concern, in accordance with
the mandate of the Office. We are committed to
supporting the fullest possible participation of
refugees and other persons of concern – as
individuals, families and communities – in decisions
that affect their lives.
• We will respect the dignity and worth of every
individual, will promote and practice understanding,
respect, compassion and tolerance, and will
demonstrate discretion and maintain confidentiality
as required. We will aim to build constructive and
respectful working relations with our humanitarian
partners, will continuously seek to improve our
performance, and will foster a climate that
encourages learning, supports positive change, and
applies the lessons learned from our experience.
• We will show respect for all persons equally
without distinction whatsoever of race, gender,
religion, colour, national or ethnic origin, language,
marital status, sexual orientation, age, socioeconomic status, disability, political conviction, or
any other distinguishing feature. We will strive to
remove all barriers to equality.
• We will respect the cultures, customs and traditions
of all peoples, and will strive to avoid behaving in
ways that are not acceptable in a particular cultural
context. However, when the tradition or practice is
considered by the relevant organ of the UN to be
directly contrary to an international human rights
instrument or standard, we will be guided by the
applicable human rights instrument or standard.
COMMITMENT TO THE
UNHCR CODE OF CONDUCT
As a staff member of UNHCR, I commit myself to:
1. Treat all refugees and other persons of concern
fairly, and with respect and dignity.
I will always seek to understand the difficult
experiences that refugees and other persons of concern
to UNHCR have faced and survived, as well as the
disadvantaged position in which they – particularly on
the basis of gender, age or disability – may find
themselves in relation to those who hold power or
influence over aspects of their lives.
I will always seek to care for and protect the rights of
children, and act in a manner that ensures that their
best interests shall be the paramount consideration.
If my job involves direct work with refugees or other
persons of concern, I will meet with them regularly, in
order to fully understand their experiences and needs,
and to explain the role of UNHCR and the scope of its
work.
I will keep myself informed about UNHCR's policies,
objectives and activities and about refugee concerns,
and will do my utmost to support the Office’s
protection and assistance work.
2. Uphold the integrity of UNHCR, by ensuring that
my personal and professional conduct is, and is seen
to be, of the highest standard.
I will demonstrate integrity, truthfulness, dedication
and honesty in my actions. I will be patient, respectful
and courteous to all persons with whom I deal in an
official capacity, including refugees and other persons
of concern, representatives of operational and
implementing partners, governments and donors.
I will observe local laws, will meet all my private legal
and financial obligations, and will not seek to take
personal advantage of any privileges or immunities
that have been conferred on me in the interest of the
UN. I will do my utmost to ensure that the conduct of
members of my household does not reflect
unfavourably on the integrity of UNHCR.
3. Perform my official duties and conduct my
private affairs in a manner that avoids conflicts of
interest, thereby preserving and enhancing public
confidence in UNHCR.
My actions will be free of any consideration of
personal gain. I will resist any undue political pressure
in decision making. I will neither seek nor accept
instructions regarding performance of my duties from
any government, my national authorities, or from an
authority external to the UN.
In accordance with Staff Regulations and Rules, I will
not accept any honour, decoration, favour gift,
remuneration, from any government; nor will I accept
these from any other source external to the UN
without prior authorization. I will not engage in any
outside occupation or employment without prior
authorization. I will not accept supplementary
payments or subsidies from a government or any other
source, or participate in certain political activities such
as standing for or holding public office.
I will avoid assisting private persons or companies in
their undertakings with UNHCR where this might lead
to actual or perceived preferential treatment. I will
never participate in activities related to procurement of
goods or services, or in human resource activities,
where a conflict of interests may arise.
4. Contribute to building a harmonious workplace
based on team spirit, mutual respect and
understanding.
I will show respect to all colleagues, regardless of
status or position, and will allow all colleagues the
opportunity to have their views heard, and to
contribute from their knowledge and experience to
team efforts. I will communicate openly and share
relevant information (subject to confidentiality) with
other colleagues, and will endeavour to respond in a
timely manner to queries.
I will respect my colleagues' privacy, and avoid
misinformation. I will seek to resolve differences and
solve problems when they arise. I will contribute to
building constructive dialogue, guided by mutual
respect and an open, positive approach, between
management and staff representatives.
As a manager/supervisor I will be open to the views of
all team members. I will provide timely feedback on
the performance of each team member through
guidance, motivation and full recognition of their
merits.
5. Promote the safety, health and welfare of all
UNHCR staff as a necessary condition for effective
and consistent performance.
I will remain aware of and comply with all instructions
designed to protect my health, welfare and safety. I
will always consider the safety of staff in operational
decisions. If I have doubts regarding an instruction
that I consider threatening to my safety or the safety of
other persons, I will bring this immediately to the
attention of my supervisor.
As a manager/supervisor, I will endeavour to ensure
that the health and well-being of staff and their
families are not subjected to undue risk. I will promote
a healthy work-life balance for staff, and will respect
staff entitlements.
6. Safeguard and make responsible use of the
information and resources to which I have access by
reason of my employment with UNHCR.
I will exercise due care in all matters of official
business, and not divulge any confidential information
about refugees, colleagues and other work-related
matters in accordance with the Staff Regulations and
Rules and current guidelines.
I will protect, manage and utilize UNHCR human,
financial and material resources efficiently and
effectively, bearing in mind that these resources have
been placed at UNHCR’s disposal for the benefit of
refugees and other persons of concern.
7. Prevent, oppose and combat all exploitation and
abuse of refugees and other persons of concern.
I undertake not to abuse the power and influence that I
have by virtue of my position over the lives and wellbeing of refugees and other persons of concern.
I will never request any service or favour from
refugees or other persons of concern in return for
protection or assistance. I will never engage in any
exploitative relationships – sexual, emotional,
financial or employment-related – with refugees or
other persons of concern.
Should I find myself in such a relationship with a
beneficiary that I consider non-exploitative and
consensual, I will report this to my supervisor for
appropriate guidance in the knowledge that this matter
will be treated with due discretion. I understand that
both my supervisor and I have available to us normal
consultative and recourse mechanisms on these issues.
I will act responsibly when hiring or otherwise
engaging refugees or other persons of concern for
private services. I will report in writing on the nature
and conditions of this employment to my supervisor.
8. Refrain from any involvement in criminal or
unethical activities, activities that contravene human
rights, or activities that compromise the image and
interests of UNHCR.
I will neither support nor take part in any form of
illegal, exploitative or abusive activities, including, for
example, child labour, and trafficking of human beings
and commodities.
As UNHCR is committed to the highest standards of
protection and care for children, I am aware that I am
expected not to engage in sexual activities with any
person under the age of 18 years. (Further guidance is
given in the Notes to this Code of Conduct - see
pg.33).
9. Refrain from any form of harassment,
discrimination, physical or verbal abuse, intimidation
or favouritism in the workplace.
I will not engage in or tolerate any form of harassment
in the workplace, including sexual harassment and
abuse of power.
As a manager/supervisor, I will not solicit favours,
loans or gifts from staff, nor will I accept unsolicited
ones that are of more than token value.
I recognize that there is an inherent conflict of interest
and potential abuse of power in having sexual relations
with staff under my supervision. Should I find myself
in such a relationship, I will resolve this conflict of
interest without delay.
NOTES ON THE CODE
Why a Code of Conduct?
In 1954 the United Nations International Civil Service
Advisory Board established Standards of Conduct in
the International Civil Service which were intended to
contribute to improved understanding of the status and
obligations of international civil servants. In 2001, the
International Civil Service Commission adopted,
revised and updated Standards of Conduct for the
International Civil Service which were welcomed by
the General Assembly in its Resolution 56/244. While
this is a document applicable to UNHCR staff, it has
been recognized that some aspects of UNHCR's work
require the highlighting of additional types of
behaviour.
In addition, the Office of the Inspector General has in
its regular inspections of UNHCR activities identified
the need for a UNHCR-specific code of conduct to
address some of the most frequently identified issues
about which UNHCR staff should concern themselves.
Parallel processes such as the development of a policy
on harassment; greater attention to the importance of a
work/life balance; the concern for the health, welfare
and safety of staff; and the increasing desire for more
consistent and effective performance management in
UNHCR have suggested that a UNHCR-specific code
would contribute to a positive organizational culture in
the Office. Periodic incidents which have come to
light through media or evaluation reports have
confirmed that a Code of Conduct could add value and
provide guidance to staff in addition to that set out in
the Staff Rules and Regulations and in the Standards
of Conduct. An administrative instruction promulgated
by the Secretary-General*
 concerning protection from
sexual exploitation and abuse further enhances the
standard of conduct for UN personnel. Work on the
UNHCR Code began in 2000 and was accelerated in
mid-2002 after a highly publicized incident relating to
the alleged sexual misconduct of humanitarian staff
and the subsequent recommendations of the InterAgency Standing Committee (IASC) which urged all
humanitarian agencies to develop agency-specific
codes of conduct. Some may still ask: Why have a
new set of standards if we already have Staff
Regulations and Rules? The Code is not meant to
replace these. It reinforces them by offering more
detailed guidance and advice on how to handle
financial, physical and emotional relationships, not
only between ourselves and the people we serve, but
also among ourselves. At this juncture it is to be
recalled that the Staff Regulations and Rules and other
administrative issuances remain the only legally
binding instruments that determines acceptable or nonacceptable conduct.
This Code explains the key values and standards of
behaviour that we are expected to observe under the
United Nations Charter and the Staff Regulations and
Rules. The Code’s Core Values and Guiding
Principles are meant to help UNHCR staff deal with
ethical and moral dilemmas linked to their
___________
*
ST/SGB/2003/13, Special Measures for Protection from Sexual
Exploitation and Sexual Abuse, (IOM-FOM/77/2003).
professional lives, and also, at times to their private
lives. It advises on issues, such as how to build a
harmonious workplace environment, and on staff
welfare, health and safety. Accordingly, the Code of
Conduct is designed to foster an organizational culture
to which UNHCR staff can be proud to belong, and to
help staff understand the kinds of behaviour that are
considered abusive or exploitative, no matter whether
this behaviour stems from conscious misconduct or
ignorance. It essentially spells out what is and what is
not acceptable for any person working for UNHCR.
There are moments when being in control of scarce
humanitarian resources vests us with enormous power.
Needless to say, the behaviour and professionalism of
most UNHCR staff is exemplary, but staff do
recognize that the abuse of power is possible. Such
abuse hurts not only the people we serve, but also
damages UNHCR’s image, our reputation and
ultimately the morale of our staff.
To whom does the Code apply?
The Code is for all UNHCR staff, and its guiding
principles should also be adhered to by persons
holding a UNHCR consultant or independent
contractor contract, UNVs, interns and other
individuals working for UNHCR. The Code is an
attempt to clarify what types of behaviour are
appropriate, particularly in situations where difficult
choices need to be made. It should be useful to all
whose conduct matters to the people we serve, and to
those in the outside world who care about the quality
of our work. Managers at all levels have a particular
responsibility for making sure that those who answer
to them are familiar with the Code, and for helping to
promote the honouring of its provisions. Managers,
who are expected to set an example, are also
responsible for communicating the Code’s principles
to those with whom we work, no matter how tenuous
or short-term their relationship with UNHCR may be.
Managers must further make sure that the people we
serve - the beneficiaries - know about our Code of
Conduct, and that they have the opportunity to report
breaches of the Code without fear of reprisal.
UNHCR recognizes that the majority of staff are
dedicated and loyal, and act in ways totally consistent
with the values and principles described in the Code.
Therefore, the introduction of the Code should not be
taken as a sign of mistrust or criticism of existing staff.
Is the Code legally binding and do we have to sign
it?
The Code does not have the force of law. It is simply a
guide to the kind of professional and personal
behaviour which is expected of all staff. However,
failure to comply with the Code may amount to
misconduct, if by any action or omission, the staff
member has violated a Staff Regulation or Rule,
taking into account all the circumstances of the case.
The High Commissioner wants every UNHCR staff
member to read and sign the Code, and this has
become a condition of recruitment as of 15 October
2002. Signature of the Code is not a legal
commitment. It simply confirms the fact that we have
read and understood that we are expected to live up to
the standards of behaviour described in the text. The
signature is without prejudice to our rights as a staff
member.
Those staff already employed by UNHCR at the time
of the Code’s introduction who did not wish to sign
were asked to give the reason for this in writing. It
should be pointed out that UNHCR has to monitor
implementation. By providing a written explanation,
staff have an opportunity to highlight their concerns.
Why the Notes on the Code?
The Code is written in a declarative manner and does
not always provide sufficient elaboration. These
explanatory notes are intended to walk the reader stepby-step through the various provisions of the Code in
order to help UNHCR staff understand the Code’s
purpose and make it easier for them to adhere to it in
everyday situations. UNHCR has also developed a
“Facilitator’s Guide” which should be used to
facilitate group sessions in the workplace, in order to
give staff an opportunity to better understand the
provisions of the Code and clarify, amongst
themselves, its implications for personal behaviour.
Managers have a special responsibility to disseminate
information. This is strongly emphasized and guidance
is available through the UNHCR Code of Conduct
“Guidelines for Managers”*
.
___________
*
IOM-FOM/06/2004.
PRINCIPLE 1*
Treat all refugees and other persons of
concern fairly, and with respect and dignity
1. Treating beneficiaries with “respect and dignity” is
our basic obligation. Behaviour or comments by any
UNHCR staff member that degrade a beneficiary or
beneficiaries are totally unacceptable, no matter
whether the beneficiaries are present or not.
2. Fair treatment of beneficiaries requires staff
members to avoid taking sides or to be seen as
favouring any one individual or group. Staff members
should not be identified with any causes other than
that which UNHCR represents. This is important for
all staff irrespective of status or position.
3. By definition, UNHCR’s beneficiaries lack the
protection they previously enjoyed in their country,
community and family. In many situations, children
and certain groups of women are especially at risk. By
understanding the specific situations of women, men,
girls and boys in a beneficiary community, we can
better protect them. UNHCR already has welldeveloped guidelines on the appropriate treatment of
refugee children and refugee women. Staff should
make themselves familiar with these guidelines and at
all times recognize the special needs of each of these
___________
*Regulation 1.2 (a) (b), (e)
 Rules 101.2 (d), paras 1, 2, 3, 4, 31, 38
groups and act in their best interests.
4. It is vital that staff see the people we serve as
human beings rather than “individual cases”,
“populations”, or “caseloads.” Impersonal,
bureaucratic terms breed a bureaucratic approach. As
humanitarian staff we need to empathize with the
people we serve and understand their situation. Direct
conversations with people, individually or in a small
group, can help us “put a human face” on complex
problems.
5. Staff should make every effort to communicate
directly with beneficiaries even when our work does
not normally involve direct contact with them. Staff
who are directly responsible for protection and
assistance to beneficiaries - including senior managers
- are expected to visit places where they live and talk
to them on a regular basis. Staff should balance the
demands of office work and official meetings with the
need to take time to keep in contact with the people we
serve.
6. UNHCR work can be very stressful, especially
when resources are scarce. Beneficiaries’ demands in
these situations can give us a sense of discomfort.
Staff should listen to their concerns and try and
involve them in finding a solution. In doing so, we
should be wary of individuals or groups who may seek
to exploit or control resources to the detriment of the
beneficiaries or particular groups of beneficiaries.
Special care should be taken in sectors where staff
control decisions relating to refugee status
determination, resettlement and the provision of
assistance.
7. Less-experienced staff in UNHCR often find
themselves in frontline field locations, frequently
without the benefit of team support close by. These
colleagues are viewed by beneficiaries and by the
public as the representatives of UNHCR. The
vulnerability of such staff to stress and insecurity,
which aggravates the lack of experience, can place
such staff in difficult positions. Supervisors should be
aware of these pressures and more experienced staff
should provide adequate guidance and support.
UNHCR staff should be well-informed about the
policy priorities of UNHCR and the guidelines
associated with these policies. Supervisors are
responsible for giving guidance in this regard and,
more generally, for coaching and guiding lessexperienced staff in performing their functions.
PRINCIPLE 2*
Uphold the integrity of UNHCR by ensuring
that my personal and professional conduct is,
and is seen to be, of the highest standard
1. To a large extent, the integrity of UNHCR depends
on the integrity of its staff members. By integrity, we
mean the overall personal and professional behaviour
of our staff. This includes honesty, truthfulness and
loyalty to the Office.
2.UNHCR staff should avoid criticizing our partner
agencies and other UN organizations in public. In case
of any problems with our partners, we should
endeavour to seek resolution directly and if the issue
persists, refer the matter to HQ. The ultimate victims
of public disputes between humanitarian agencies are
often the beneficiaries.
3.The privileges and immunities that we enjoy as staff
members of the UN are conferred upon us solely in the
interest of the Organization. They do not exempt us
from observing local laws or provide an excuse for
ignoring private legal or financial obligations.
Honouring our private obligations is a matter of
integrity and honesty. Failure to do so may be treated
as a disciplinary matter under the Staff Regulations
and Rules. For example, diplomatic immunity that
comes with our position as UN officials is not a reason
for ignoring our personal legal obligations such as
___________
*Regulations 1.1 (f), 1.2 (a) (b)
 Rules 101.2 (c), 103, 18 (b) (iii), Paras 36, 38-40
respect for local traffic regulations, alimony payments
and repayment of debts.
4. Even though nobody should be telling adults how to
manage their private lives, including personal
relationships, we should not forget that whatever we
do outside our homes may become the object of public
scrutiny. In general, staff should not implicate
UNHCR in any way by frequenting locations or
undertaking activities that verge on illegality. Staff are
expected to show respect for the local practices and
customs of the host government. Additional caution is
required while serving in small duty stations where
anonymity of a UN official in practice does not exist.
5. In principle, UNHCR has no right to interfere with
the private lives of staff members. However, in many
parts of the world our family members enjoy
privileges and immunities and are regarded by the
public as “unofficial ambassadors”. This is why we
should do our utmost to ensure that members of our
household know the importance of maintaining high
standards of personal conduct.
PRINCIPLE 3*
Perform my official duties and conduct my
private affairs in a manner that avoids
conflicts of interest, thereby preserving and
enhancing public confidence in UNHCR
1. The use of one’s office or position in UNHCR for
personal gain is unacceptable and unprofessional.
Conducting private business from a UNHCR office, or
using UNHCR facilities for private business, also
constitutes unacceptable behaviour.
2. At the time of joining UNHCR, we all specifically
pledge not to seek or accept instructions in regard to
the performance of our duties from any government or
other authority external to the UN. This does not, of
course, affect contacts of staff at the appropriate level
with government officials which help good relations
with Member States, and which contribute to trust and
confidence in UNHCR and promote its interests.
3. Staff must avoid accepting any honour, decoration,
favour, gift or remuneration from any government.
When this is unavoidable, however, we must be
extremely careful not to accept gifts of value which
might constitute a real or apparent attempt to influence
our decisions or actions.
4. The primary professional obligation of a staff
member is to devote our energies and capacity fully to
___________
*Regulations 1.2 (e) (f) (g) (h) (k) (m) (n) (q), 1.3 (b)
 Rule 101.2 (i) (j) (k) (m) (p) (q), paras 8, 12, 21, 22, 41-47
the work of UNHCR. In addition, outside activities
have to be compatible with the staff member’s status
as an international civil servant. Therefore prior
authorization must be sought before engaging in any
outside activity in order to ensure that there is no
conflict of interest.
5. In general, UNHCR staff must not accept payments
or other subsidies from a government or any other
source. If there is any doubt, it is the responsibility of
staff members to seek advice from the Human
Resources Service.
6. While UNHCR staff retain the right to vote, we may
not run for or hold local or national political office.
UNHCR staff must exercise discretion in their support
for a political party or campaign. We should never
accept or solicit funds for political purposes, write
articles or make campaign-related public statements.
Staff may, however, participate in local community or
civic activities, provided that this is consistent with
our solemn declaration made when entering the
services of the UN.
7. Staff who manage decisions related to refugee status
determination, resettlement, assistance and
procurement may be subject to pressures or offers
which involve dishonest practices. Those of us in such
situations must be particularly careful to act, and be
seen to act, with the utmost transparency and integrity.
In case of any doubt, we should consult our supervisor
to seek guidance.
PRINCIPLE 4*
Contribute to building a harmonious
workplace based on team spirit, mutual
respect and understanding
1. All managers and staff are responsible for building a
teamwork environment. Politeness, respect, tolerance,
and moderation should be the norm. Good
performance is not only about how quickly and
efficiently we perform our tasks but also about how
well we interact with others. Insulting conduct is
inexcusable even if the colleague who behaves in that
manner is otherwise considered by many to be an
efficient worker. In light of the diverse backgrounds,
cultures and experiences of UNHCR staff, we should
take extra care to respect our colleagues. Lack of
communication, personality differences, and lack of
empathy, i.e. the inability or unwillingness to see other
colleagues’ points of view can have a serious negative
impact on the work environment. Team spirit means
transparency in decision-making and is fostered by
staff taking a positive and optimistic approach to their
work.
2. An adversarial office environment not only stifles
ideas, initiative, and creativity; it also harms UNHCR.
It often leads to absenteeism, low productivity, and
low morale. There must be trust and open dialogue
between management and other staff. Elected staff
representatives in their statutory role should be
___________
*Regulations 1.2 (a) (b), 8.1, 8.2
 Rules 101.2 (d) (e) (i), 108.1, 108.2, paras 6, 14, 15-19, 26-28
protected against discriminatory or prejudicial
treatment.
3. There is often a fine line between poor managerial
practices and the issues of conduct covered by this
Code. Accordingly, managers not only have a
particular responsibility for, but can also have
significant influence in fostering a harmonious
workplace. Managers should be open to all views,
including those of their junior staff, particularly when
those views are opposed to their own. Managers are
expected to set a good example.
PRINCIPLE 5*
Promote the safety, health and welfare of all
UNHCR staff as a necessary condition for
effective and consistent performance
1. UNHCR as an institution is responsible for the
safety and welfare of its staff. Staff should strictly
observe safety and security instructions and
demonstrate responsible behaviour that minimizes
risks for themselves and others.
2. Staff should follow instructions relating to security
and safety issued internally by UNHCR as well as
those issued by the United Nations Designated Official
for security matters. If staff members have doubts as to
whether an instruction threatens their own safety or
that of others they should first consult their supervisor.
Staff members have, in exceptional circumstances, the
right to refrain from executing instructions in the
following situations:
a) Where the instruction is in breach of existing
UNHCR and UN security policies and regulations;
b) Where the staff member has reasonable grounds to
believe that carrying out specific instructions will
expose him/her or others to unnecessary risks.
Where there is such a difference in views, staff are
advised to put their concern in writing and if they
wish, to consult the higher level supervisor.
___________
*Regulations 1.2 (c), 6.2
 Rules 101.2 (b), 104.16, 105.1, 105.3, 106.2, 106.3, 106.4, 107.24, para 37
A supervisor who gives instructions that involve a
potential for high risk to safety and security, should be
held liable and accountable.
3. A reasonable work/life balance is essential to
maintain productivity at work. This includes using
various entitlements designed to allow staff to rest and
recuperate. Managers are expected to encourage staff
to use such entitlements. Staff should avoid the
abusive use of alcohol and drugs. A reduced level of
physical and mental fitness can also have implications
on the safety of staff.
PRINCIPLE 6*
Safeguard and make responsible use of
the information and resources to which I
have access by reason of my employment
with UNHCR
1. Disclosure of sensitive or confidential information
without authorization may seriously jeopardize the
efficiency and credibility of UNHCR and its staff, and
endanger beneficiaries. This includes, but is not
restricted to, contacts with the media. It is understood
that these provisions do not affect established
procedures governing the exchange of information
between UNHCR, on the one hand, and government
representatives, national authorities, NGOs, donors etc
on the other.
2. We are all responsible for the resources entrusted to
us by UNHCR and we must be able to account for
every penny spent on UNHCR’s behalf and every
decision we take, be this in human resources or in
financial matters. Being careless with human, financial
and material resources is incompatible with honesty
and professional integrity. Staff should be careful not
to allow private interests to impact on their work
duties. UNHCR recognizes that certain activities of a
personal nature can only reasonably be undertaken in
working hours. Many staff also face the reality of
official tasks impacting on “after-hours” personal
time. What is important here is that staff maintain a
___________
*Regulations 1.1 (b), 1.2 (d) (f) (g) (i) (m) (n)
 Rules 101.2 (f) (g) (h), 105.2(iv), 112.3, paras 31, 34, 35
reasonable balance and that supervisors give
reasonable guidance, at all times keeping the
requirements of the Office and the staff members’
right to a work/life balance in mind. Within this
context, staff should not, for example: misuse office
assets; use an official vehicle for private purposes
without authorization; perform excessive and
unreasonable private business during working time;
use office equipment for private purposes; and have
staff or official contractors provide unremunerated
private services.
PRINCIPLE 7*
Prevent, oppose and combat all
exploitation and abuse of refugees and
other persons of concern
1. Having at our disposal scarce humanitarian
resources puts us in a position of power vis-à-vis the
people whose survival may depend on our assistance.
That power must never be abused. Requesting favours
or accepting bribes or offers of favours in exchange
for protection or aid is totally unacceptable.
2. Unequal power relationships generally exist
between UNHCR staff and beneficiaries. We therefore
have to keep in mind that sexual, emotional, financial
or employment relationships between staff and
beneficiaries, even if we ourselves see them as
consensual and non-exploitative, could be perceived
by others in the humanitarian community and the
public as an abuse of power and trust, or as a conflict
of interest. According to a Secretary-General’s
Bulletin from 2003,** sexual relationships with
beneficiaries undermine the credibility and integrity of
the work of the UN and are strongly discouraged.
Where there is any doubt, it is in the interests of staff
to discuss these relationships with the supervisor.
Where supervisors are consulted, it is expected that
___________
*Regulations 1.1 (d), 1.2 (a) (b) (e) (l)
 Rule 101.2 (i) (j), paras 22, 38
**Secretary-General’s bulletin – ST/SGB/2003/13 (para 3.2 (c).
 IOM-FOM/77/2003.
they will respect confidentiality and treat sensitive
matters with discretion. Staff and supervisors can also
avail themselves of the normal consultative options
such as the Staff Welfare Section, Staff Council and
Staff Associations. In case of disagreement staff may
resort to recourse options such as the Mediator.
3. Staff who hire beneficiaries for private services,
such as housekeeping, must be aware that they may be
seen as abusing their economic power or favouring
certain individuals. In some places where we work, the
economic gap between us and the people we serve is
so huge that any association with us could be seen as a
privilege and a position of advantage. On the other
hand, working as a private employee for a staff
member is sometimes the only possible source of
income for a refugee and his/her family. This means
that we must do all we can to avoid that this is
perceived as an abuse of our power and/or as
favouring those whom we employ. One rule of thumb
would be to ensure that conditions of employment are
no worse than locally accepted norms whether
governed by local law or not. Reporting to, or
discussing the existence of such an employment
relationship with our supervisor is a step intended to
establish clarity in what could otherwise become an
ethically ambiguous situation.
4. Sexual exploitation and sexual abuse violate
universally recognized international legal norms and
standards and as such have always been unacceptable
behaviour and prohibited conduct for UNHCR staff.
Specific standards that reiterate these existing general
obligations under the rules and obligations have been
promulgated. Degrading or exploitative behaviour
such as exchange of money, employment, goods or
services for sex or sexual favours, or other forms of
humiliation are prohibited to UNHCR staff or any
other UN Personnel. This includes any exchange of
assistance that is due to beneficiaries of assistance.
PRINCIPLE 8*
Refrain from any involvement in criminal or
unethical activities, activities that contravene
human rights, or activities that compromise
the image and interests of UNHCR
1. No staff member of integrity will engage or support
any illegal, exploitative, abusive or unethical activities
that violate human dignity or contravene UN
resolutions or international human rights standards. It
does not matter whether such activities are carried out
within UNHCR premises or using UNHCR assets, or
whether this appears to be common practice within the
community where we work or tolerated by the local
police or judicial system.
2. Sexual exploitation and abuse, constitute acts of
serious misconduct and are therefore grounds for
disciplinary measures, including summary dismissal.**

Any concerns or suspicions regarding sexual
exploitation or sexual abuse by a fellow worker,
regardless whether in the same agency or not and
whether or not within the UN system, must be
reported through the established mechanisms. Also
please refer to IOM-65/FOM-65/2003, “The role and
function of the Inspector General’s Office” which
defines the reporting lines and procedures for such
concerns if they are related to UNHCR personnel.
___________
*Regulations 1.1 (d), 1.2 (a) (b) (e)
 Rule 101.2 (c), paras 36, 38, 40
**ST/SGB/2003/13 Special Measures for Protection from Sexual
 Exploitation and Sexual Abuse.
3. Our private lives should remain private. UNHCR
has no business regulating our private conduct, unless
it is illegal under local law or has negative impact on
our work or the people whom we serve.
4. According to paragraph 3.2.(b) of the SecretaryGeneral’s Bulletin ST/SGB/2003/13 of 9 October
2003, sexual activity with children (persons under 18)
is prohibited regardless of the age of majority or age of
consent locally. Mistaken belief in the age of a child is
not a defence. However, according to paragraph 4.4 of
the Bulletin, this does not apply where a staff member
is legally married to someone who is under the age of
18 but over the age of majority or consent in their
country of citizenship.
5. According to paragraph 3(c) of the same Bulletin,
the exchange of money, employment, goods or
services for sex or sexual favours or other forms of
humiliating, degrading or exploitative behaviour, is
prohibited. This includes prostitution.
PRINCIPLE 9*
Refrain from any form of harassment,
discrimination, physical or verbal abuse,
intimidation or favouritism in the workplace
1. Discrimination and harassment have a negative
effect on the workplace environment, the career and
well-being of staff. Discrimination, harassment, or
bullying (mobbing) on the grounds of race, gender,
religion, colour, national or ethnic origin, language,
marital status, sexual orientation, age, socio-economic
status, disability, political conviction, hierarchy within
UNHCR or any other distinguishing feature, must not
be tolerated. Harassment can take many forms. It can
be physical, verbal, visual or written (including
electronic media such as e-mails). It can also be one
incident or a series of incidents and can occur at work
or during non-working hours. Harassment typically
involves a person in a position of power or authority
as the initiator, but it should be recognized that staff in
subordinate or equal positions may also be initiators.
Staff, either singly or as a group, may be victims of or
perpetrators of harassment.
2. UN staff are obliged to create and maintain an
environment that prevents sexual exploitation and
sexual abuse. Managers, at all levels, have a particular
responsibility to support and develop systems that
__________
*Regulations 1.1 (d), 1.2 (a) (b) (l)
 Rule 101.2 (d) (i) (j), 104.10 (c) (d), paras 16, 20
maintain this environment. Moreover, they have a
special obligation in the workplace to uphold the
highest standards of conduct, free of intimidation and
personal favouritism because of their authority, and its
inherent danger of abuse. The traditional respect of
hierarchical structure within UNHCR creates a greater
risk that this authority might be abused consciously or
unconsciously. The solicitation or acceptance of
favours, loans, or gifts of substantial value by
managers from colleagues with whom they work
would be improper.
3.A consensual sexual and/or romantic relationship
with a work colleague may not cause harm to either
party and may not have detrimental professional
consequences. However, staff in supervisory or
positions of authority should be aware of the
difficulties that may arise and the possible negative
perception of other staff when they enter into such a
relationship with subordinates. Difficulties may arise
in relation to: maintaining proper boundaries between
professional and personal life, exhibiting bias in
performance assessments, compromising on correct
professional decisions or negatively impacting team
relationships in the working environment. It may be
particularly difficult to convince other staff that their
colleague has not been favoured because of the
relationship. This applies not only to direct supervisorstaff member relationships, but also to relationships
for example between the head of a field office and all
staff serving in that office.
4.For these reasons, staff who find themselves in, or
entering into, such a relationship have to resolve this
conflict without delay. This means that they either
must not pursue the relationship or else inform their
supervisor of the situation. The supervisor will then
advise the staff member whether or not she/he should
seek a new assignment or a transfer with a view to
removing the power or hierarchical relationship
between the two staff members concerned. Staff and
supervisors can also avail themselves of the normal
consultative options such as the Staff Welfare Section,
Staff Council and Staff Associations.
SECRETARY-GENERAL’S BULLETIN
Special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse
SGB/2003/13
9 October 2003
The Secretary-General, for the purpose of preventing
and addressing cases of sexual exploitation and sexual
abuse, and taking into consideration General
Assembly resolution 57/306 of 15 April 2003,
“Investigation into sexual exploitation of refugees by
aid workers in West Africa”, promulgates the
following in consultation with Executive Heads of
separately administered organs and programmes of the
United Nations:
Section 1: Definitions
For the purposes of the present bulletin, the term
“sexual exploitation” means any actual or attempted
abuse of a position of vulnerability, differential power,
or trust, for sexual purposes, including, but not limited
to, profiting monetarily, socially or politically from the
sexual exploitation of another. Similarly, the term
“sexual abuse” means the actual or threatened physical
intrusion of a sexual nature, whether by force or under
unequal or coercive conditions.
Section 2: Scope of application
2.1 The present bulletin shall apply to all staff of the
United Nations, including staff of separately
administered organs and programmes of the United
Nations.
2.2 United Nations forces conducting operations
under United Nations command and control are
prohibited from committing acts of sexual exploitation
and sexual abuse, and have a particular duty of care
towards women and children, pursuant to section 7 of
Secretary-General’s bulletin ST/SGB/1999/13, entitled
“Observance by United Nations forces of international
humanitarian law”.
2.3 Secretary-General’s bulletin ST/SGB/253,
entitled “Promotion of equal treatment of men and
women in the Secretariat and prevention of sexual
harassment”, and the related administrative
instruction*
 set forth policies and procedures for
handling cases of sexual harassment in the Secretariat
of the United Nations. Separately administered organs
and programmes of the United Nations have
promulgated similar policies and procedures.
Section 3: Prohibition of sexual exploitation and
sexual abuse
3.1 Sexual exploitation and sexual abuse violate
universally recognized international legal norms and
standards and have always been unacceptable
behaviour and prohibited conduct for United Nations
staff. Such conduct is prohibited by the United Nations
Staff Regulations and Rules.
__________
*Currently ST/AI/379 entitled “Procedures for dealing with sexual
harassment”.
3.2 In order to further protect the most vulnerable
populations, especially women and children, the
following specific standards which reiterate existing
general obligations under the United Nations Staff
Regulations and Rules, are promulgated:
(a) Sexual exploitation and sexual abuse constitute
acts of serious misconduct and are therefore grounds
for disciplinary measures, including summary
dismissal;
(b) Sexual activity with children (persons under the
age of 18) is prohibited regardless of the age of
majority or age of consent locally. Mistaken belief in
the age of a child is not a defence;
(c) Exchange of money, employment, goods or
services for sex, including sexual favours or other
forms of humiliating, degrading or exploitative
behaviour, is prohibited. This includes any exchange
of assistance that is due to beneficiaries of assistance;
(d) Sexual relationships between United Nations staff
and beneficiaries of assistance, since they are based on
inherently unequal power dynamics, undermine the
credibility and integrity of the work of the United
Nations and are strongly discouraged;
(e) Where a United Nations staff member develops
concerns or suspicions regarding sexual exploitation or
sexual abuse by a fellow worker, whether in the same
agency or not and whether or not within the United
Nations system, he or she must report such concerns
via established reporting mechanisms;
(f) United Nations staff are obliged to create and
maintain an environment that prevents sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse. Managers at all levels
have a particular responsibility to support and develop
systems that maintain this environment.
3.3 The standards set out above are not intended to be
an exhaustive list. Other types of sexually exploitive
or sexually abusive behaviour may be grounds for
administrative action or disciplinary measures,
including summary dismissal, pursuant to the United
Nations Staff Regulations and Rules.
Section 4: Duties of Heads of Departments, Offices
and Missions
4.1 The Head of Department, Office or Mission, as
appropriate, shall be responsible for creating and
maintaining an environment that prevents sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse, and shall take
appropriate measures for this purpose. In particular,
the Head of Department, Office or Mission shall
inform his or her staff of the contents of the present
bulletin and ascertain that each staff member receives
a copy.
4.2 The Head of Department, Office or Mission shall
be responsible for taking appropriate action in cases
where there is reason to believe that any of the
standards listed in section 3.2 above have been
violated or any behaviour referred to in section 3.3
above has occurred. This action shall be taken in
accordance with established rules and procedures for
dealing with cases of staff misconduct.
4.3 The Head of Department, Office or Mission shall
appoint an official, at a sufficiently high level, to serve
as a focal point for receiving reports on cases of sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse. With respect to
Missions, the staff of the Mission and the local
population shall be properly informed of the existence
and role of the focal point and of how to contact him
or her. All reports of sexual exploitation and sexual
abuse shall be handled in a confidential manner in
order to protect the rights of all involved. However,
such reports may be used, where necessary, for action
taken pursuant to section 4.2 above.
4.4 The Head of Department, Office or Mission shall
not apply the standard prescribed in section 3.2 (b),
where a staff member is legally married to someone
under the age of 18 but over the age of majority or
consent in their country of citizenship.
4.5 The Head of Department, Office or Mission may
use his or her discretion in applying the standard
prescribed in section 3.2 (d), where beneficiaries of
assistance are over the age of 18 and the circumstances
of the case justify an exception.
4.6 The Head of Department, Office or Mission shall
promptly inform the Department of Management of its
investigations into cases of sexual exploitation and
sexual abuse, and the actions it has taken as a result of
such investigations.
Section 5: Referral to national authorities
If, after proper investigation, there is evidence to
support allegations of sexual exploitation or sexual
abuse, these cases may, upon consultation with the
Office of Legal Affairs, be referred to national
authorities for criminal prosecution.
Section 6: Cooperative arrangements with nonUnited Nations entities or individuals
6.1 When entering into cooperative arrangements
with non-United Nations entities or individuals,
relevant United Nations officials shall inform those
entities or individuals of the standards of conduct
listed in section 3, and shall receive a written
undertaking from those entities or individuals that they
accept these standards.
6.2 The failure of those entities or individuals to take
preventive measures against sexual exploitation or
sexual abuse, to investigate allegations thereof, or to
take corrective action when sexual exploitation or
sexual abuse has occurred, shall constitute grounds for
termination of any cooperative arrangement with the
United Nations.
Section 7: Entry into force
The present bulletin shall enter into force on 15
October 2003.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan
Secretary-General
CONTACT INFORMATION
FOR UNHCR STAFF
IN NEED OF ADVICE OR SUPPORT ON
THE CODE OF CONDUCT
For general enquiries on the Code of Conduct and
its interpretation:
UNHCR Ethics Office
Tel: (+41 22) 739 8957 / 8794
Fax: (+41 22) 739 7381
Email: ethicsoffice@unhcr.org
For reporting allegations of misconduct, please
report either to your direct supervisor or:
Inspector General’s Office (IGO)
Tel: (+41 22) 739 8844
Fax: (+41 22) 739 7380
Email: inspector@unhcr.org
For legal advice to applicable procedures and on
relevant Staff Regulations and Rules:
Legal Affairs Section
Tel: (+41 22) 739 7831
Fax: (+41 22) 739 7391
Email: hqle00@unhcr.org
For discussion and counselling on personal issues
related to the Code of Conduct:
Staff Welfare Section, Tél: (+41 22) 739 7947
Fax: (+41 22) 739 7370, Email: hqsw00@unhcr.org
Dubravka SUZIC-KOFI
Tél: (+41 22) 739 7947
Fax: (+41 22) 739 7370
Email: hqsw00@unhcr.org
Misko MIMICA
Tél : (+41 22) 739 8082
Fax : (+41 22) 7397370
Email :mimica@unhcr.org
Daniela MENES
Tél: (+41 22) 739 8324
Fax: (+41 22) 739 7370
Email:menes@unhcr.org
For confidential advice and guidance to staff
members on workplace related problems:
UNHCR Ombudsman’s Office
Tel: (+41 22) 739 7770
Fax: (+41 22) 739 7340
Email: ombuds@unhcr.org
Staff may seek advice and support from the
UNHCR Staff Council in Geneva or their local
Staff Association:
UNHCR Staff Council
Tel: (+41 22) 739 7930
Fax: (+41 22) 739 7364
Email: hqsr00@unhcr.org
When staff contact any of the listed services, they will be treated with respect and dignity.
All communications will be protected to the greatest extent possible. All concerns will be
seriously addressed and informed of eventual outcomes.

This booklet concerning the UNHCR Code of Conduct
is available for distribution to UNHCR implementing
partners, local government officials and nongovernmental organizations.
For additional copies of this booklet, contact:
Ethics Office
UNHCR
Case postale 2500
CH – 1211 Geneva 2
Suisse
Email :
ethicsoffice@unhcr.org

